the hand of oberon                                                                 
the first amber pentology - corwin’s story: book 4                                 
                                                                      
chapter 1                                                                          
a bright flash of insight, to match that peculiar sun…                             
there it was… displayed within that light, a thing i had only seen self-           
illuminated in darkness up until then: the pattern, the great pattern of           
amber cast upon an oval shelf beneath/above a strange sky-sea.                     
… and i knew, perhaps by that within me which bound us, that this had              
to be the real one. which meant that the pattern in amber was but its first        
shadow. which meant—                                                               
which meant that amber itself was not carried over into places beyond              
the realm of amber, rebma, and tir-na nog’th. meaning, then, that this             
place to which we had come was, by the law of precedence and                       
configuration, the real amber.                                                     
i turned to a smiling ganelon, his beard and wild hair molten in the               
merciless light.                                                                   
“how did you know?” i asked him.                                                   
“you know i am a very good guesser, corwin,” he replied, “and i recall             
everything you ever told me about how things work in amber: how its                
shadow and those of your struggles are cast across the worlds. i often             
wondered, in thinking of the black road, whether anything could have cast          
such a shadow into amber itself. and i imagined that such a something              
would have to be extremely basic, powerful, and secret.” he gestured at the        
scene before us. “like that.”                                                      
“continue,” i said.                                                                
his expression changed and he shrugged.                                            
“so there had to be a layer of reality deeper than your amber,” he                 
explained, “where the dirty work was done. your patron beast led us to             
what seems to be such a place, and that blot on the pattern looks to be the        
dirty work. you agreed.”                                                           
i nodded.                                                                          
“it was your perceptiveness rather than the conclusion itself which                
stunned me so,” i said.                                                            
“you beat me to it,” admitted random, off to my right, “but the feeling            
has found its way into my intestines—to put it delicately. i do believe that       
somehow that is the basis of our world down there.”                                
“an outsider can sometimes see things better than one who is part of               
them,” ganelon offered.                                                            
random glanced at me and returned his attention to the spectacle.                  
“do you think things will change any more,” he asked, “if we go down               
for a closer look?”                                                                
“only one way to find out,” i said.                                                
“single file, then,” random agreed. “i’ll lead.”                                   
“all right.”                                                                       
random guided his mount to the right, the left, the right, in a long series        
of switchbacks which zigged us and zagged us across most of the face of            
the wall. continuing in the order we had maintained all day, i followed him        
and ganelon came last.                                                             
“seems stable enough now,” random called back.                                     
“so far,” i said.                                                                  
“some sort of opening in the rocks below.”                                         
i leaned forward. there was a cave mouth back to the right, on level               
with the oval plain. its situation was such that it had been hidden from sight     
when we had occupied our higher position.                                          
“we pass fairly near it,” i said.                                                  
“—quickly, cautiously, and silently,” random added, drawing his blade.             
i unsheathed grayswandir, and one turn back above me ganelon drew                  
his own weapon.                                                                    
we did not pass the opening, but turned leftward once more before we               
came to it. we moved within ten or fifteen feet of it, however, and i              
detected an unpleasant odor which i could not identify. the horses must            
have done a better job of it, though, or been pessimists by nature, because        
they flattened their ears, widened their nostrils, and made alarmed noises         
while turning against the reins. they calmed, however, as soon as we had           
made the turn and begun moving away once again. they did not suffer a              
relapse until we reached the end of our descent and moved to approach the          
damaged pattern. they refused to go near it.                                       
random dismounted. he advanced to the edge of the design, paused and               
stared. after a time, he spoke without looking back.                               
“it follows that the damage was deliberate,” he said, “from everything             
else that we know.”                                                                
“it seems to follow,” i said.                                                      
“it is also obvious that we were brought here for a reason.”                       
“i’d say so.”                                                                      
“then it does not take too much imagination to conclude that our                   
purpose for being here is to determine how the pattern was damaged and             
what might be done to repair it.”                                                  
“possibly. what is your diagnosis?”                                                
“nothing yet.”                                                                     
he moved along the perimeter of the figure, off to the right where the             
smear-effect began. i resheathed my blade and prepared to dismount.                
ganelon reached over and took hold of my shoulder.                                 
“i can make it myself—” i began.                                                   
but, “corwin,” he said, ignoring my words, “there does appear to be a              
small irregularity out toward the middle of the pattern. it does not look like     
something that belongs…”                                                           
“where?”                                                                           
he pointed and i followed the gesture.                                             
there was some foreign object near the center. a stick? a stone? a                 
stray bit of paper…? it was impossible to tell from this distance.                 
“i see it,” i said.                                                                
we dismounted and headed toward random, who by then was crouched                   
at the extreme right of the figure, examining the discoloration.                   
“ganelon’s spotted something out toward the center,” i said.                       
random nodded.                                                                     
“i’ve noticed it,” he replied. “i was just trying to decide on the best way        
to head out for a better look. i do not relish the notion of walking a broken      
pattern. on the other hand, i was wondering what i would be laying myself          
open to if i tried heading in across the blackened area. what do you think?”       
“walking what there is of the pattern would take some time,” i said, “if           
the resistance is on par with what it is at home. also, we have been taught        
that it is death to stray from it—and this setup would force me to leave it        
when i reach the blot. on the other hand, as you say, i might be alerting our      
enemies by treading on the black. so—”                                             
“so neither of you is going to do it,” ganelon interrupted. “i am.”                
then, without waiting for a reply, he took a running leap into the black           
sector, raced along it toward the center, paused long enough to pick up            
some small object, turned and headed back. moments later, he stood before          
us.                                                                                
“that was a risky thing to do,” random said. he nodded.                            
“but you two would still be debating it if i hadn’t.”                              
he raised his hand and extended it.                                                
“now, what do you make of this?”                                                   
he was holding a dagger. impaled on it was a rectangle of stained                  
pasteboard. i took them from him.                                                  
“looks like a trump,” random said.                                                 
“yes.”                                                                             
i worked the card loose, smoothed down the torn sections. the man i                
regarded upon it was half familiar—meaning of course that he was also half         
strange. light, straight hair, a trifle sharp-featured, a small smile, somewhat    
slight of build.                                                                   
i shook my head.                                                                   
“i do not know him,” i said.                                                       
“let me see.” random took the card from me, frowned at it.                         
“no,” he said after a time. “i don’t either. it almost seems as though i           
should, but… no.”                                                                  
at that moment, the horses renewed their complaints much more                      
forcefully. and we needed but turn part way to learn the cause of their            
discomfort, in that it had chosen that moment to emerge from the cave.             
“damn,” said random. i agreed with him.                                            
ganelon cleared his throat, took forth his blade.                                  
“anyone know what it is?” he asked quietly.                                        
my first impression of the beast was that it was snakelike, both from its          
movements and because of the fact that its long thick tail seemed more a           
continuation of its long thin body than a mere appendage. it moved on four         
double-jointed legs, however, large-footed and wickedly clawed. its narrow         
head was beaked, and it swung from side to side as it advanced, showing us         
one pale blue eye and then the other. large wings were folded against its          
sides, purple and leathery. it possessed neither hair nor feathers, though         
there were scaled areas across its breast, shoulders, back, and along the          
length of its tail. from beak-bayonet to twisting tail-tip it seemed a little      
over three meters. there was a small tinkling sound as it moved, and i             
caught a flash of something bright at its throat.                                  
“closest thing i know,” said random, “is a heraldic beast—the griffin.             
only this one is bald and purple.”                                                 
“definitely not our national bird,” i added, drawing grayswandir and               
swinging its point into line with the creature’s head.                             
the beast darted a red, forked tongue. it raised its wings a few inches,           
then let them fall. when its head swung to the right its tail moved to the         
left, then left and right, right and left—producing a near-hypnotic, flowing       
effect as it advanced.                                                             
it seemed more concerned with the horses than with us, however, for its            
course was directed well past us toward the spot where our mounts stood            
quivering and stamping. i moved to interpose myself. at that point, it             
reared.                                                                            
its wings went up and out, spreading like a pair of slack sails suddenly           
caught by a gust of wind. it was back on its hind legs and towering above          
us, seeming to occupy at least four times the space it had previously. and         
then it shrieked, a god-awful, hunting scream or challenge that left my ears       
ringing. with that, it snapped those wings downward and sprang, becoming           
temporarily airborne.                                                              
the horses bolted and ran. the beast was beyond our reach. it was only             
then that i realized what the bright flash and the tinkling had represented.       
the thing was tethered, by means of a long chain running back into the             
cave. the exact length of its leash was immediately a question of more than        
academic interest.                                                                 
i turned as it passed, hissing, flapping, and falling, beyond us. it had not       
possessed sufficient momentum to obtain true flight in that brief rush             
upward. i saw that star and firedrake were retreating toward the far end of        
the oval. random’s mount iago, on the other hand, had bolted in the                
direction of the pattern.                                                          
the beast touched ground again, turned, as if to pursue iago, appeared             
to study us once more, and froze. it was much nearer this time—under four          
meters—and it cocked its head, showing us its right eye, then opened its           
beak and made a soft cawing noise.                                                 
“what say we rush it now?” said random.                                            
“no. wait. there is something peculiar about its behavior.”                        
it had dropped its head while i was speaking, spreading its wings                  
downward. it struck the ground three times with its beak and looked up             
again. then it drew its wings part way back toward its body. its tail              
twitched once, then swing more vigorously from side to side. it opened its         
beak and repeated the cawing sound.                                                
at that moment we were distracted.                                                 
iago had entered the pattern, well to the side of the darkened area. five          
or six meters into it, standing obliquely across the lines of power, he was        
caught near one of the veil points like an insect on a piece of flypaper. he       
cried loudly as the sparks came up about him and his mane rose and stood           
erect.                                                                             
immediately, the sky began to darken directly overhead. but it was no              
cloud of water vapor which had begun to coalesce. rather, it was a perfectly       
circular formation which had appeared, red at the center, yellow nearer the        
edges, turning in a clockwise direction. a sound like a single bell chime          
followed by the growl of a bull-roarer suddenly came to our ears.                  
iago continued his struggles, first freeing his right front foot, then             
entangling it again as he freed the left, neighing wildly the while. the           
sparks were up to his shoulders by then, and he shook them like raindrops          
from his body and neck, his entire form taking on a soft, buttery glow.            
the roaring increased in volume and small lightnings began to play at              
the heart of the red thing above us. a rattling noise caught my attention at       
that moment, and i glanced downward to discover that the purple griffin            
had slithered past and moved to interpose itself between us and the loud red       
phenomenon. it crouched like a gargoyle, facing away from us, watching             
the spectacle.                                                                     
just then, iago freed both front feet and reared. there was something              
insubstantial about him by then, what with his brightness and the spark-shot       
indistinctness of his outline. he might have neighed at that moment, but all       
other sounds were submerged by the incessant roar from above.                      
a funnel descended from the noisy formation—bright, flashing, wailing              
now, and tremendously fast. it touched the rearing horse, and for a moment         
his outline expanded enormously, becoming increasingly tenuous in direct           
proportion to this effect. and then he was gone. for a brief interval, the         
funnel remained stationary, like a perfectly balanced top. then the sound          
began to diminish.                                                                 
the trunk raised itself, slowly, to a point but a small distance—perhaps           
the height of a man—above the pattern. then it snapped upward as quickly           
as it had descended.                                                               
the wailing ceased. the roaring began to subside. the miniature                    
lightnings faded within the circle. the entire formation began to pale and         
slow. a moment later, it was but a bit of darkness; another moment and it          
was gone.                                                                          
no trace of iago remained anywhere that i could see.                               
“don’t ask me,” i said when random turned toward me. “i don’t know                 
either.”                                                                           
he nodded, then directed his attention toward our purple companion,                
who was just then rattling his chain.                                              
“what about charlie here?” he asked, fingering his blade.                          
“i had the distinct impression he was trying to protect us,” i said, taking        
a step forward. “cover me. i want to try something.”                               
“you sure you can move fast enough?” he asked. “with that side…”                   
“don’t worry,” i said, a trifle more heartily than necessary, and i kept           
moving.                                                                            
he was correct about my left side, where the healing knife wound still             
ached dully and seemed to exercise a drag on my movements. but                     
grayswandir was still in my right hand and this was one of those occasions         
when my trust in my instincts was running high. i had relied on this feeling       
in the past with good results. there are times when such gambles just seem         
to be in order.                                                                    
random moved ahead and to the right. i turned sidewise and extended                
my left hand as you would in introducing yourself to a strange dog, slowly.        
our heraldic companion had risen from its crouch and was turning.                  
it faced us again and studied ganelon, off to my left. then it regarded            
my hand. it lowered its head and repeated the ground-striking movement,            
cawed very softly—a small, bubbling sound—raised its head and slowly               
extended it. it wagged its great tail, touched my fingers with its beak, then      
repeated the performance. carefully, i placed my hand on its head. the             
wagging increased; its head remained motionless. i scratched it gently about       
the neck and it turned its head slowly then, as if enjoying it. i withdrew my      
hand and dropped back a pace.                                                      
“i think we’re friends,” i said softly. “now you try it. random.”                  
“are you kidding?”                                                                 
“no, i’m sure you’re safe. try it.”                                                
“what will you do if you are wrong?”                                               
“apologize.”                                                                       
“great.”                                                                           
he advanced and offered his hand. the beast remained friendly.                     
“all right,” he said half a minute or so later, still stroking its neck,           
“what have we proved?”                                                             
“that he is a watchdog.”                                                           
“what is he watching?”                                                             
“the pattern, apparently.”                                                         
“offhand then,” said random, moving back, “i would say that his work               
leaves something to be desired.” he gestured at the dark area. “which is           
understandable, if he is this friendly to anyone who doesn’t eat oats and          
whinny.”                                                                           
“my guess is that he is quite selective. it is also possible that he was set       
here after the damage was done, to defend against further unappreciated            
activity.”                                                                         
“who set him?”                                                                     
“i’d like to know myself. someone on our side, apparently.”                        
“you can now test your theory further by letting ganelon approach                  
him.”                                                                              
ganelon did not move.                                                              
“it may be you have a family smell about you,” he finally said, “and he            
only favors amberites. so i will pass, thank you.”                                 
“all right. it is not that important. your guesses have been good so far.          
how do you interpret events?”                                                      
“of the two factions out for the throne,” he said, “that composed of               
brand, fiona, and bleys was, as you said, more aware of the nature of the          
forces that play about amber. brand did not supply you with particulars—           
unless you omitted some incidents he might have related—but my guess is            
that this damage to the pattern represents the means by which their allies         
gained access to your realm. one or more of them did that damage, which            
provided the dark route. if the watchdog here responds to a family smell or        
some other identifying information you all possess, then he could actually         
have been here all along and not seen fit to move against the despoilers.”         
“possibly,” random observed. “any idea how it was accomplished?”                   
“perhaps,” he replied. “i will let you demonstrate it for me, if you are           
willing.”                                                                          
“what does it involve?”                                                            
“come this way,” he said, turning and heading over to the edge of the              
pattern.                                                                           
i followed him. random did the same. the watchgriffin slunk at my                  
side.                                                                              
ganelon turned and extended his hand.                                              
“corwin, may i trouble you for that dagger i fetched us?”                          
“here,” i said, drawing it from my belt and passing it over.                       
“i repeat, what does it involve?” random inquired.                                 
“the blood of amber,” ganelon replied.                                             
“i am not so sure i like this idea,” random said.                                  
“all you have to do is prick your finger with it,” he said, extending the          
blade, “and let a drop fall upon the pattern.”                                     
“what will happen?”                                                                
“let’s try it and see.”                                                            
random looked at me.                                                               
“what do you say?” he asked.                                                       
“go ahead. let’s find out. i’m intrigued.”                                         
he nodded.                                                                         
“okay.”                                                                            
he received the blade from ganelon and nicked the tip of his left little           
finger. he squeezed the finger then, holding it above the pattern. a tiny red      
bead appeared, grew larger, quivered, fell.                                        
immediately, a wisp of smoke rose from the spot where it struck,                   
accompanied by a tiny crackling noise.                                             
“i’ll be damned!” said random, apparently fascinated.                              
a tiny stain had come into being, gradually spreading to about the size            
of a half dollar.                                                                  
“there you are,” said ganelon. “that is how it was done.”                          
the stain was indeed a miniature counterpart of the massive blot further           
to our right. the watchgriffin gave forth a small shriek and drew back,            
rapidly turning his head from one of us to the other.                              
“easy, fellow. easy,” i said, reaching out and calming him once more.              
“but what could have caused such a large—” random began, and then                  
he nodded slowly.                                                                  
“what indeed?” said ganelon. “i see no mark to show where your horse               
was destroyed.”                                                                    
“the blood of amber,” random said. “you are just full of insights                  
today, aren’t you?”                                                                
“ask corwin to tell you of lorraine, the place where i dwelled for so              
long,” he said, “the place where the dark circle grew. i am alert to the           
effects of those powers, though i knew them then only at a distance. these         
matters have become clearer to me with each new thing i have learned from          
you. yes, i have insights now that i know more of these workings. ask              
corwin of the mind of his general.”                                                
“corwin,” random said, “give me the pierced trump.”                                
i withdrew it from my pocket and smoothed it. the stains seemed more               
ominous now. another thing also struck me. i did not believe that it had           
been executed by dworkin, sage, mage, artist, and one-time mentor to the           
children of oberon. it had not occurred to me until that moment that anyone        
else might be capable of producing one. while the style of this one did            
seem somehow familiar, it was not his work. where had i seen that                  
deliberate line before, less spontaneous than the master’s, as though every        
movement had been totally intellectualized before the pen touched the              
paper? and there was something else wrong with it—a quality of                     
idealization of a different order from that of our own trumps, almost as if        
the artist had been working with old memories, glimpses, or descriptions           
rather than a living subject.                                                      
“the trump, corwin. if you please,” random said.                                   
there was that about the way in which he said it to make me hesitate. it           
gave rise to the feeling that he was somehow a jump ahead of me on                 
something important, a feeling which i did not like at all.                        
“i’ve petted old ugly here for you, and i’ve just bled for the cause,              
corwin. now let’s have it.”                                                        
i handed it over, my uneasiness increasing as he held it in his hand and           
furrowed his brow. why was i suddenly the stupid one? does a night in tir-         
na nog’th slow cerebration? why—                                                   
random began to curse, a string of profanities unsurpassed by anything             
encountered in my long military career.                                            
then, “what is it?” i said. “i don’t understand.”                                  
“the blood of amber,” he finally said. “whoever did it walked the                  
pattern first, you see. then they stood there at the center and contacted him      
via this trump. when he responded and a firm contact was achieved, they            
stabbed him. his blood flowed upon the pattern, obliterating that part of it,      
as mine did here.”                                                                 
he was silent for the space of several deep breaths.                               
“it smacks of a ritual,” i said.                                                   
“damn rituals!” he said. “damn all of them! one of them is going to                
die, corwin. i am going to kill him—or her.”                                       
“i still do not—”                                                                  
“i am a fool,” he said, “for not seeing it right away. look! look                  
closely!”                                                                          
he thrust the pierced trump at me. i stared. i still did not see.                  
“now look at me!” he said. “see me!”                                               
i did. then i looked back at the card. i realized what he meant.                   
“i was never anything to him but a whisper of life in the darkness. but            
they used my son for this,” he said.                                               
“that has to be a picture of martin.”                                              
                                                                      
chapter 2                                                                          
standing there beside the broken pattern, regarding a picture of the man           
who may or may not have been random’s son, who may or may not have                 
died of a knife wound received from a point within the pattern, i turned and       
took a giant step back within my mind for an instant replay of the events          
which had brought me to this point of peculiar revelation. i had learned so        
many new things recently that the occurrences of the past few years seemed         
almost to constitute a different story than they had while i was living them.      
now this new possibility and a number of things it implied had just shifted        
the perspective again.                                                             
i had not even been aware of my name when i had awakened in                        
greenwood, that private hospital in upstate new york where i had spent             
two totally blank weeks subsequent to my accident. it was only recently that       
i had been told that the accident itself had been engineered by my brother         
bleys, immediately following my escape from the porter sanitarium in               
albany. i got this story from my brother brand, who had railroaded me into         
porter in the first place, by means of fake psychiatric evidence. at porter, i     
had been subjected to electroshock therapy over the span of several days,          
results ambiguous but presumably involving the return of a few memories.           
apparently, this was what had scared bleys into making the attempt on my           
life at the time of my escape, shooting out a couple of my tires on a curve        
above a lake. this doubtless would have resulted in my death, had brand            
not been a step behind bleys and out to protect his insurance investment,          
me. he said he had gotten word to the cops, dragged me out of the lake, and        
administered first aid until help arrived. shortly after that, he was captured     
by his former partners—bleys and our sister fiona—who confined him in a            
guarded tower in a distant place in shadow.                                        
there had been two cabals, plotting and counterplotting after the throne,          
treading on one another’s heels, breathing down one another’s necks, and           
doing anything else to one another that might suggest itself at that range.        
our brother eric, backed by brothers julian and caine, had been preparing          
to take the throne, long left vacant by the unexplained absence of our father,     
oberon. unexplained to eric, julian, and caine, that is. to the other group,       
consisting of bleys, fiona, and—formerly—brand, it was not unexplained             
because they were responsible for it. they had arranged for this state of          
affairs to come into being in order to open the way for bleys’s accession to       
the throne. but brand had committed a tactical error in attempting to obtain       
caine’s assistance in their play for the throne, in that caine decided a better    
deal obtained in upholding eric’s part. this left brand under close scrutiny,      
but did not immediately result in the betrayal of his partners’ identities. at     
about that time, bleys and fiona decided to employ their secret allies             
against eric. brand had demurred in this, fearing the strength of those            
forces, and as a result had been rejected by bleys and fiona. with everyone        
on his back then, he had sought to upset the balance of powers completely          
by journeying to the shadow earth where eric had left me to die centuries          
before. it was only later that eric had learned that i had not died but was        
possessed of total amnesia, which was almost as good, had set sister flora         
to watch over my exile, and hoped that that was the last of it. brand later        
told me he had gotten me committed to porter in a desperate move to                
restore my memory as a preliminary to my return to amber.                          
while fiona and bleys had been dealing with brand, eric had been in                
touch with flora. she had arranged for my transfer to greenwood from the           
clinic to which the police had taken me, with instructions to keep me              
narcotized, while eric began arrangements for his coronation in amber.             
shortly thereafter, our brother random’s idyllic existence in texorami was         
broken when brand managed to send him a message outside the normal                 
family channels—i.e., the trumps—requesting deliverance. while random,             
who was blissfully nonpartisan in the power struggle, was about this               
business, i managed to deliver myself from greenwood, still relatively             
unmemoried. having obtained flora’s address from greenwood’s                       
frightened director, i betook myself to her place in westchester, engaged in       
some elaborate bluffing, and moved in as a house guest. random, in the             
meantime, had been less than successful in his attempt to rescue brand.            
slaying the snaky warden of the tower, he had had to flee its inner guards,        
utilizing one of the region’s strangely mobile rocks. the guards, a hardy          
band of not quite human guys, had succeeded in pursuing him through                
shadow, however, a feat normally impossible for most nonamberites.                 
random had fled then to the shadow earth where i was guiding flora along           
the paths of misunderstanding while attempting to locate the proper route to       
enlightenment as to my own circumstances. crossing the continent in                
response to my assurance that he would be under my protection. random              
had come believing that his pursuers were my own creatures. when i                 
helped him destroy them he was puzzled but unwilling to raise the issue            
while i seemed engaged in some private maneuver throneward. in fact, he            
had easily been tricked into conveying me back to amber through shadow.            
this venture had proved beneficial in some respects while much less                
satisfactory in others. when i had finally revealed the true state of my           
personal situation, random and our sister deirdre, whom we had                     
encountered along the way, conducted me to amber’s mirror city within the          
sea, rebma. there i had walked the image of the pattern and recovered the          
bulk of my memories as a result—thereby also settling the issue as to              
whether i was the real corwin or merely one of his shadows. from rebma i           
had traveled into amber, utilizing the power of the pattern to effect an           
instantaneous journey home. after fighting an inconclusive duel with eric, i       
had fled via the trumps into the keeping of my beloved brother and would-          
be assassin, bleys.                                                                
i joined with bleys in an attack on amber, a mismanaged affair which               
we had lost. bleys vanished during the final engagement, under                     
circumstances which looked likely to prove fatal but, the more that i learned      
and thought about it, probably had not. this left me to become eric’s              
prisoner and an unwilling party to his coronation, after which he had had          
me blinded and locked away. a few years in the dungeons of amber had               
seen a regeneration of my eyes, in direct proportion to the deterioration of       
my state of mind. it was only the accidental appearance of dad’s old               
adviser dworkin, worse off mentally than myself, which had led to a way of         
escape.                                                                            
after that, i set about recovering and i resolved to be more prudent the           
next time i went after eric. i journeyed through shadow toward an old land         
where i had once reigned—avalon—with plans to obtain there a substance             
of which i alone among amberites was aware, a chemical unique in its               
ability to undergo detonation in amber. en route, i had passed through the         
land of lorraine, there encountering my old exiled avalonian general               
ganelon, or someone very much like him. i remained because of a wounded            
knight, a girl, and a local menace peculiarly similar to a thing occurring in      
the vicinity of amber herself—a growing black circle somehow related to            
the black road our enemies traveled, a thing for which i held myself partly        
responsible because of a curse i had pronounced at the time of my blinding.        
i won the battle, lost the girl, and traveled on to avalon with ganelon.           
the avalon we reached, we quickly learned, was under the protection of             
my brother benedict, who had been having troubles of his own with a                
situation possibly akin to the black circle/black road menaces. benedict had       
lost his right arm in the final engagement, but had been victorious in his         
battle with the hellmaids. he had warned me to keep my intentions toward           
amber and eric pure, and had then allowed us the hospitality of his manor          
while he remained for a few days more in the field. it was at his place that i     
met dara.                                                                          
dara told me she was benedict’s great-granddaughter, whose existence               
had been kept secret from amber. she drew me out as far as she could on            
amber, the pattern, the trumps, and our ability to walk in shadow. she was         
also an extremely skilled fencer. we indulged in a bit of casual lovemaking        
on my return from a hellride to a place where i obtained a sufficient              
quantity of rough diamonds to pay for the things i was going to need for my        
assault on amber. the following day, ganelon and i picked up our supply            
of the necessary chemicals and departed for the shadow earth where i had           
spent my exile, there to obtain automatic weapons and ammunition                   
manufactured to my specifications.                                                 
en route, we had some difficulties along the black road, which seemed              
to have extended its scope of influence among the worlds of shadow. we             
were equal to the troubles it presented, but i almost perished in a duel with      
benedict, who had pursued us through a wild hellride. too angry for                
argument, he had fought me through a small wood—still a better man than            
i, even wielding his blade left-handed. i had only managed to best him by          
means of a trick involving a property of the black road of which he was            
unaware. i had been convinced that he wanted my blood because of the               
affair with dara. but no. in the few words that passed between us he denied        
any knowledge of the existence of such a person. instead, he had come after        
us convinced that i had murdered his servants. now, ganelon had indeed             
located some fresh corpses in the wood at benedict’s place, but we had             
agreed to forget about them, having no idea as to their identities and no          
desire to complicate our existence any further.                                    
leaving benedict in the care of brother gerard, whom i had summoned                
via his trump from amber, ganelon and i proceeded to the shadow earth,             
armed ourselves, recruited a strike force in shadow, and headed off to             
attack amber. but upon our arrival we discovered that amber was already            
under attack by creatures which had come in along the black road. my new           
weapons quickly turned the tide in amber’s favor, and my brother eric died         
in that battle, leaving me his problems, his ill will, and the jewel of            
judgment—a weather-controlling weapon he had used against me when                  
bleys and i had attacked amber.                                                    
at that point, dara showed up, swept on by us, rode into amber, found              
her way to the pattern, and proceeded to walk it—prima-facie evidence that         
we were indeed somehow related. during the course of this ordeal,                  
however, she had exhibited what appeared to be peculiar physical                   
transformations. upon completion of the pattern, she announced that                
amber would be destroyed. then she had vanished.                                   
about a week later, brother caine was murdered, under conditions                   
arranged to show me as the culprit. the fact that i had slain his slayer was       
hardly satisfactory evidence of my innocence, in that the guy was                  
necessarily in no condition to talk about it. realizing, however, that i had       
seen his like before, in the persons of those creatures who had pursued            
random into flora’s home, i finally found time to sit down with random             
and hear the story of his unsuccessful attempt to rescue brand from his            
tower.                                                                             
random, subsequent to my leaving him in rebma years before, when i                 
had journeyed to amber to fight my duel with eric, had been forced by              
rebma’s queen, moire, to marry a woman of her court: vialle, a lovely              
blind girl. this was partly intended as a punishment for random, who years         
before had left moire’s late daughter morganthe pregnant with martin, the          
apparent subject of the damaged trump random now held in his hands.                
strangely, for random, he appeared to have fallen in love with vialle, and         
he now resided legendary unicorn of amber.                                         
after i left random, i fetched the jewel of judgment and took it down              
to the chamber of the pattern. there, i followed the partial instructions i had    
received for purposes of attuning it to my use. i underwent some unusual           
sensations during the process and was successful in obtaining control of its       
most obvious function: the ability to direct meteorological phenomena.             
after that, i questioned flora concerning my exile. her story seemed               
reasonable and jibed with those facts i did possess, although i had the            
feeling she was holding back somewhat on events at the time of my                  
accident. she did promise to identify caine’s slayer as one of the same sort       
as those individuals random and i had fought at her home in westchester,           
however, and she assured me of her support in anything i might currently be        
about.                                                                             
at the time i had heard random’s story, i was still unaware of the two             
factions and their machinations. i decided then that if brand were still           
living, his rescue was of first importance, if for no other reason than the fact   
that he obviously possessed information that someone did not want                  
circulated. i hit on a scheme for achieving this, the trial of which was only      
postponed for the time required by gerard and myself for returning caine’s         
body to amber. part of this time, however, was appropriated by gerard for          
purposes of beating me unconscious, just in case i had forgotten he was            
capable of the feat, to add weight to his words when he informed me that he        
would personally kill me should it turn out that i was the author of amber’s       
present woes. it was the most exclusive closed circuit fight i knew of,            
viewed by the family via gerard’s trump—an act of insurance should i               
actually be the culprit and have a mind to erase his name from the list of the     
living because of his threat. we journeyed on to the grove of the unicorn          
then and exhumed caine. at that time, we actually caught a brief glimpse of        
the legendary unicorn of amber.                                                    
that evening we met in the library of the palace in amber—we being                 
random, gerard, benedict, julian, deirdre, fiona, flora, llewella, and             
myself. there, we tested my idea for finding brand. it amounted to all nine        
of us simultaneously attempting to reach him via his trump. and we                 
succeeded.                                                                         
we contacted him and were successful in transporting him back to                   
amber. in the midst of the excitement, however, with all of us crowded             
about as gerard bore him through, someone planted a dagger in brand’s              
side. gerard immediately elected himself attending physician and cleared           
the room.                                                                          
the rest of us moved to a downstairs sitting room, there to backbite and           
discuss events. during this time, fiona advised me that the jewel of               
judgment might represent a hazard in situations of prolonged exposure,             
suggesting the possibility that it, rather than his wounds, might have been        
the cause of eric’s death. one of the first signs, she believed, was a             
distortion of one’s time-sense—an apparent slowdown of temporal                    
sequence, actually representing a speed-up of physiological events. i              
resolved to be more cautious with it, in that she was more conversant with         
these matters than the rest of us, having once been an advanced pupil of           
dworkin’s.                                                                         
and perhaps she was correct. perhaps there was such an effect in                   
operation later that evening when i returned to my own quarters. at least, it      
seemed as if the person who attempted to kill me was moving a trifle more          
slowly than i would have myself under similar circumstances. at that, the          
stroke was almost successful. the blade caught me in the side and the world        
went away.                                                                         
leaking life, i awoke in my old bed in my old home on the shadow                   
earth where i had dwelled for so long as carl corey. how i had been                
returned, i had no idea. i crawled outside and into a blizzard. clinging           
precariously to consciousness, i cached the jewel of judgment in my old            
compost heap, for the world did indeed seem to be slowing down about me.           
then i made it to the road, to try flagging down a passing motorist.               
it was a friend and former neighbor. bill roth, who found me there and             
drove me to the nearest clinic. there, i was treated by the same doctor who        
had attended me years before, at the time of my accident. he suspected i           
might be a psychiatric case, as the old record did reflect that faked state of     
affairs.                                                                           
bill showed up later, however, and set a number of things right. an                
attorney, he had grown curious at the time of my disappearance and done            
some investigating. he had learned about my fake certification and my              
successive escapes. he even possessed details on these matters and on the          
accident itself. he still felt there was something strange about me, but it did    
not really bother him that much.                                                   
later, random contacted me via my trump and advised me that brand                  
had come around and was asking for me. with random’s assistance, i                 
returned to amber. i went to see brand. it was then that i learned of the          
nature of the power struggle which had been going on about me, and the             
identities of the participants. his story, together with what bill had told me     
back on the shadow earth, finally brought some sense and coherence to              
occurrences of the past several years. he also told me more concerning the         
nature of the danger we currently faced.                                           
i did nothing the following day, ostensibly for purposes of preparing              
myself for a visit to tir-na nog’th, actually to buy additional time in which      
to recover from my injury. this commitment made, however, it had to be             
kept. i did journey to the city in the sky that night, encountering a confusing    
collection of signs and portents, signifying perhaps nothing, and collecting       
a peculiar mechanical arm from the ghost of my brother benedict while i            
was about it.                                                                      
returned from this excursion on high, i breakfasted with random and                
ganelon before setting out across kolvir to return home. slowly,                   
bewilderingly, the trail began to change about us. it was as though we were        
walking in shadow, a well-nigh impossible feat this near to amber. when            
we reached this conclusion, we tried to alter our course, but neither random       
nor i was able to affect the changing scene. about that time, the unicorn put      
in an appearance. it seemed to want us to follow it. we did.                       
it had led us through a kaleidoscopic series of changes, until finally we          
arrived at this pace, where it abandoned us to our present devices.                
now, with this entire sequence of events tumbling through my head, my              
mind moved about the peripheries, pushed its way forward, returned to the          
words random had just spoken. i felt that i was slightly ahead of him once         
more. for how long this state of affairs might last, i did not know, but i         
realized where i had seen work by the same hand which had executed the             
pierced trump.                                                                     
brand had often painted when he was entering one of his melancholy                 
periods, and his favorite techniques came to mind as i recalled canvas after       
canvas he had brightened or darkened. add to this his campaign of years            
before to obtain recollections and descriptions from everyone who had              
known martin. while random had not recognized his style, i wondered                
how long it might be before he began thinking as i just had about the              
possible ends of brand’s information gathering. even if his hand had not           
actually propelled the blade, brand was party to the act by providing the          
means. i knew random well enough to know that he meant what he had                 
said. he would try to kill brand as soon as he saw the connection. this was        
going to be more than awkward.                                                     
it had nothing to do with the fact that brand had probably saved my life.          
i figured i had squared accounts with him by getting him out of that               
damned tower. no. it was neither indebtedness nor sentiment that caused            
me to cast about for ways to mislead random or slow him down. it was the           
naked, frigid fact that i needed brand. he had seen to that. my reason for         
saving him was no more altruistic than his had been in dragging me out of          
the lake. he possessed something i needed now: information. he had                 
realized this immediately and he was rationing it—his life’s union dues.           
“i do see the resemblance,” i said to random, “and you may well be                 
right about what happened.”                                                        
“of course i am right.”                                                            
“it is the card that was pierced,” i said.                                         
“obviously. i don’t—”                                                              
“he was not brought through on the trump, then. the person who did it              
therefore made contact, but was unable to persuade him to come across.”            
“so? the contact had progressed to a point of sufficient solidity and              
proximity that he was able to stab him anyway. he was probably even able           
to achieve a mental lock and hold him where he was while he bled. the kid          
probably hadn’t had much experience with the trumps.”                              
“maybe yes, maybe no,” i said. “llewella or moire might be able to tell            
us how much he knew about the trumps. but what i was getting at was the            
possibility that contact could have been broken before death. if he inherited      
your regenerative abilities he might have survived.”                               
“might have? i don’t want guesses! i want answers!”                                
i commenced a balancing act within my mind. i believed i knew                      
something that he did not, but then my source was not the best. also, i            
wanted to keep quiet about the possibility because i had not had a chance to       
discuss it with benedict. on the other hand, martin was random’s son, and          
i did want to direct his attention away from brand.                                
“random, i may have something,” i said.                                            
“what?”                                                                            
“right after brand was stabbed,” i said, “when we were talking together            
in the sitting room, do you remember when the conversation turned to the           
subject of martin?”                                                                
“yes. nothing new came up.”                                                        
“i had something i might have added at that time, but i restrained                 
myself because everyone was there. also, because i wanted to pursue it in          
private with the party concerned.”                                                 
“who?”                                                                             
“benedict.”                                                                        
“benedict? what has he to do with martin?”                                         
“i do not know. that is why i wanted to keep it quiet until i found out.           
and my source of information was a touchy one, at that”                            
“go ahead.”                                                                        
“dara. benedict gets mad as hell whenever i mention her name, but so               
far a number of things she told me have proved correct—things like the             
journey of julian and gerard along the black road, their injury, their stay in     
avalon. benedict admitted these things had happened.”                              
“what did she say about martin?”                                                   
indeed. how to phrase it without giving away the show on brand…?                   
dara had said that brand had visited benedict a number of times in avalon,         
over a span of years. the time differential between amber and avalon is            
such that it seemed likely, now that i thought about it, that the visits fell into 
the period when brand was so actively seeking information on martin. i had         
wondered what kept drawing him back there, since he and benedict had               
never been especially chummy.                                                      
“only that benedict had had a visitor named martin, whom she thought               
was from amber,” i lied.                                                           
“when?”                                                                            
“some while back. i’m not sure.”                                                   
“why didn’t you tell me this before?”                                              
“it is not really very much—and besides, you had never seemed                      
especially interested in martin.”                                                  
random shifted his gaze to the griffin, crouched and gurgling on my                
right, then nodded.                                                                
“i am now,” he said. “things change. if he is still alive, i would like to         
get to know him. if he is not…”                                                    
“okay,” i said. “the best way to be about either one is to start figuring a        
way to get home. i believe we have seen what we were supposed to see and           
i would like to clear out.”                                                        
“i was thinking about that,” he said, “and it occurred to me that we               
could probably use this pattern for that purpose. just head out to the center      
and transfer back.”                                                                
“going in along the dark area?” i asked.                                           
“why not? ganelon has already tried it and he’s okay.”                             
“a moment,” said ganelon. “i did not say that it was easy, and i am                
positive you could not get the horses to go that route.”                           
“what do you mean?” i said.                                                        
“do you remember that place where we crossed the black road—back                   
when we were fleeing avalon?”                                                      
“of course.”                                                                       
“well, the sensations i experienced in retrieving the card and the dagger          
were not unlike the upset that came over us at that time. it is one of the         
reasons i was running so fast. i would favor trying the trumps again first,        
under the theory that this point is congruent with amber.”                         
i nodded.                                                                          
“all right. we might as well try making it as easy as we can. let’s                
collect the horses first.”                                                         
we did this, learning the length of the griffin’s leash while we were              
about it. he was drawn up short about thirty meters from the cave mouth,           
and immediately set up a bleating complaint. this did not make the job of          
pacifying the horses any easier, but it did give rise to a peculiar notion         
which i decided to keep to myself.                                                 
once we had things under control. random located his trumps and i                  
brought out my own.                                                                
“let’s try for benedict,” he said.                                                 
“all right. any time now.”                                                         
i noticed immediately that the cards felt cold again, a good sign. i               
shuffled out benedict’s and began the preliminaries. beside me, random             
did the same. contact came almost at once.                                         
“what is the occasion?” benedict asked, his eyes moving over random,               
ganelon, and the horses, then meeting with my own.                                 
“will you bring us through?” i said.                                               
“horses, too?”                                                                     
“the works.”                                                                       
“come ahead.”                                                                      
he extended his hand and i touched it. we all moved toward him.                    
moments later, we stood with him in a high, rocky place, a chill wind              
ruffling our garments, the sun of amber past midday in a sky full of clouds.       
benedict wore a stiff leather jacket and buckskin leggings. his shirt was a        
faded yellow. an orange cloak concealed the stump of his right arm. he             
tightened his long jaw and peered down at me.                                      
“interesting spot you hie from,” he said. “i glimpsed something of the             
background.”                                                                       
i nodded.                                                                          
“interesting view from this height, also,” i said, noting the spyglass at          
his belt at the same time that i realized we stood on the wide ledge of rock       
from which eric had commanded battle on the day of his death and my                
return. i moved to regard the dark swath through garnath, far below and            
stretching off to the horizon.                                                     
“yes,” he said. “the black road appears to have stabilized its boundaries          
at most points. at a few others though, it is still widening. it is almost as if   
it is nearing a final conformity with some—pattern… now tell me, from              
what point have you journeyed?”                                                    
“i spent last night in tir-na nog’th,” i said, “and this morning we went           
astray in crossing kolvir.”                                                        
“not an easy thing to do,” he said. “getting lost on your own mountain.            
you keep heading east, you know. that is the direction from which the sun          
has been known to take its course.”                                                
i felt my face flush.                                                              
“there was an accident,” i said, looking away. “we lost a horse.”                  
“what sort of accident?”                                                           
“a serious one—for the horse.”                                                     
“benedict,” said random, suddenly looking up from what i realized to               
be the pierced trump, “what can you tell me concerning my son martin?”             
benedict studied him for several moments before he spoke. then, “why               
the sudden interest?” he asked.                                                    
“because i have reason to believe he may be dead,” he said. “if that is            
the case, i want to avenge it. if it is not the case—well, the thought that it     
might be has caused me some upset. if he is still living, i would like to meet     
him and talk with him.”                                                            
“what makes you think he might be dead?”                                           
random glanced at me. i nodded.                                                    
“start with breakfast,” i said.                                                    
“while he is doing that, i’ll find us lunch,” said ganelon, rummaging in           
one of the bags.                                                                   
“the unicorn showed us the way…” random began.                                     
                                                                      
chapter 3                                                                          
we sat in silence. random had finished speaking and benedict was staring           
skyward over gamath. his face betrayed nothing. i had long ago learned to          
respect his silence.                                                               
at length, he nodded, once, sharply, and turned to regard random.                  
“i have long suspected something of this order,” he stated, “from things           
that dad and dworkin let fall over the years. i had the impression there was       
a primal pattern which they had either located or created, situating our           
amber but a shadow away to draw upon its forces. i never obtained any              
notion as to how one might travel to that place, however.” he turned back          
toward gamath, gesturing with his chin. “and that, you tell me,                    
corresponds to what was done there?”                                               
“it seems to,” random replied.                                                     
“…brought about by the shedding of martin’s blood?”                                
“i think so”                                                                       
benedict raised the trump random had passed him during his                         
narration. at that time, benedict had made no comment.                             
“yes,” he said now, “this is martin. he came to me after he departed               
rebma. he stayed with me a long while”                                             
“why did he go to you?” random asked.                                              
benedict smiled faintly.                                                           
“he had to go somewhere, you know,” he said. “he was sick of his                   
position in rebma, ambivalent toward amber, young, free, and just come             
into his power through the pattern. he wanted to get away, see new things,         
travel in shadow—as we all did. i had taken him to avalon once when he             
was a small boy, to let him walk on dry land of a summer, to teach him to          
ride a horse, to have him see a crop harvested. when he was suddenly in a          
position to go anywhere he would in an instant, his choices were still             
restricted to the few places of which he had knowledge. true, he might             
have dreamed up a place in that instant and gone there—creating it, as it          
were. but he was also aware that he still had many things to learn, to ensure      
his safety in shadow. so he elected to come to me, to ask me to teach him.         
and i did. he spent the better part of a year at my place. i taught him to         
fight, taught him of the ways of the trumps and of shadow, instructed him          
in those things an amberite must know if he is to survive.”                        
“why did you do all these things?” random asked.                                   
“someone had to. it was me that he came to, so it was mine to do,”                 
benedict replied. “it was not as if i were not very fond of the boy, though,”      
he added. random nodded.                                                           
“you say that he was with you for almost a year. what became of him                
after that?”                                                                       
“that wanderlust you know as well as i. once he had obtained some                  
confidence in his abilities, he wanted to exercise them. in the course of          
instructing him, i had taken him on journeys in shadow myself, had                 
introduced him to people of my acquaintance at various places. but there           
came a time when he wanted to make his own way. one day then, he bade              
me good-by and fared forth.”                                                       
“have you seen him since?” random asked.                                           
“yes. he returned periodically, staying with me for a time, to tell me of          
his adventures, his discoveries. it was always clear that it was just a visit.     
after a time, he would get restless and depart again.”                             
“when was the last time you saw him?”                                              
“several years ago, avalon time, under the usual circumstances. he                 
showed up one morning, stayed for perhaps two weeks, told me of the                
things he had seen and done, talked of the many things he wanted to do.            
later, he set off once more.”                                                      
“and you never heard from him again?”                                              
“on the contrary. there were messages left with mutual friends when he             
would pass their way. occasionally, he would even contact me via my                
trump—”                                                                            
“he had a set of the trumps?” i broke in.                                          
“yes, i made him a gift of one of my extra decks.”                                 
“did you have a trump for him?” he shook his head.                                 
“i was not even aware that such a trump existed, until i saw this one,”            
he said, raising the card, glancing at it, and passing it back to random. “i       
haven’t the art to prepare one. random, have you tried reaching him with           
this trump?”                                                                       
“yes, any number of times since we came across it. just a few minutes              
ago, as a matter of fact. nothing.”                                                
“of course that proves nothing. if everything occurred as you guessed              
and he did survive it, he may have resolved to block any future attempts at        
contact. he does know how to do that.”                                             
“did it occur as i guessed? do you know more about it?”                            
“i have an idea,” benedict said. “you see, he did show up injured at a             
friend’s place—off in shadow some years ago. it was a body wound, caused           
by the thrust of a blade. they said he came to them in very bad shape and          
did not go into details as to what had occurred. he remained for a few days        
—until he was able to get around again—and departed before he was really           
fully recovered. that was the last they heard of him. the last that i did,         
also.”                                                                             
“weren’t you curious?” random asked. “didn’t you go looking for                    
him?”                                                                              
“of course i was curious. i still am. but a man should have the right to           
lead his own life without the meddling of relatives, no matter how well-           
intentioned. he had pulled through the crisis and he did not attempt to            
contact me. he apparently knew what he wanted to do. he did leave a                
message for me with the tecys, saying that when i learned of what had              
happened i was not to worry, that he knew what he was about.”                      
“the tecys?” i said.                                                               
“that’s right. friends of mine off in shadow.”                                     
i refrained from saying the things that i might. i had thought them just           
another part of dara’s story, for she had so twisted the truth in other areas.     
she had mentioned the tecys to me as if she knew them, as if she had               
stayed with them—all with benedict’s knowledge. the moment did not                 
seem appropriate, however, to tell him of my previous night’s vision in tir-       
na nog’th and the things it had indicated concerning his relationship to the       
girl. i had not yet had sufficient time to ponder the matter and all that it       
implied.                                                                           
random stood, paced, paused near the ledge, his back to us, fingers                
knotted behind him. after a moment, he turned and stalked back.                    
“how can we get in touch with the tecys?” he asked benedict.                       
“no way,” said benedict, “except to go and see them.”                              
random turned to me.                                                               
“corwin, i need a horse. you say that star’s been through a number of              
hellrides…”                                                                        
“he’s had a busy morning.”                                                         
“it wasn’t that strenuous. it was mostly fright, and he seems okay now.            
may i borrow him?”                                                                 
before i could answer, he turned toward benedict.                                  
“you’ll take me, won’t you?” he said.                                              
benedict hesitated.                                                                
“i do not know what more there is to learn—” he began.                             
“anything! anything at all they might remember—possibly something                  
that did not really seem important at the time but is now, knowing what we         
know.”                                                                             
benedict looked to me. i nodded.                                                   
“he can ride star, if you are willing to take him.”                                
“all right,” benedict said, getting to his feet. “i’ll fetch my mount.”            
he turned and headed off toward the place where the great striped beast            
was tethered.                                                                      
“thanks, corwin,” random said.                                                     
“i’ll let you do me a favor in return.”                                            
“what?”                                                                            
“let me borrow martin’s trump.”                                                    
“what for?”                                                                        
“an idea just hit me. it is too complicated to get into if you want to get         
moving. no harm should come of it, though.”                                        
he chewed his lip.                                                                 
“okay. i want it back when you are done with it.”                                  
“of course.”                                                                       
“will it help find him?”                                                           
“maybe.”                                                                           
he passed me the card.                                                             
“you heading back to the palace now?” he asked.                                    
“yes.”                                                                             
“would you tell vialle what has happened and where i have gone? she                
worries.”                                                                          
“sure. i’ll do that.”                                                              
“i’ll take good care of star.”                                                     
“i know that. good luck.”                                                          
“thanks.”                                                                          
i rode firedrake. ganelon walked. he had insisted. we followed the route i         
had taken in pursuing dara on the day of the battle. along with recent             
developments, that is probably what made me think of her again. i dusted           
off my feelings and examined them carefully. i realized then that despite the      
games she had played with me, the killings she had doubtless been privy or         
party to, and her stated designs upon the realm, i was still attracted to her by   
something more than curiosity. i was not really surprised to discover this.        
things had looked pretty much the same the last time i had pulled a                
surprise inspection in the emotional barracks. i wondered then how much of         
truth there might have been to my final vision of the previous night,              
wherein her possible line of descent from benedict had been stated. there          
was indeed a physical resemblance, and i was more than half-convinced. in          
the ghost city, of course, the shade of benedict had conceded as much,             
raising his new, strange arm in her defense…                                       
“what’s funny?” ganelon asked, from where he strode to my left.                    
“the arm,” i said, “that came to me from tir-na nog’th—i had worried               
over some hidden import, some unforeseen force of destiny to the thing,            
coming as it had into our world from that place of mystery and dream. yet it       
did not even last the day. nothing remained when the pattern destroyed             
iago. the entire evening’s visions come to nothing.”                               
ganelon cleared his throat.                                                        
“well, it wasn’t exactly the way you seem to think,” he said.                      
“what do you mean?”                                                                
“that arm device was not in iago’s saddlebag. random stowed it in                  
your bag. that’s where the food was, and after we had eaten he returned the        
utensils to where they had been in his own bag, but not the arm. there was         
no space.”                                                                         
“oh,” i said. “then—”                                                              
ganelon nodded. “—so he has it with him now,” he finished.                         
“the arm and benedict both. damn! i’ve small liking for that thing. it             
tried to kill me. no one has ever been attacked in tir-na nog’th before.”          
“but benedict, benedict’s okay. he’s on our side, even if you have                 
some differences at the moment. right?”                                            
i did not answer him.                                                              
he reached up and took firedrake’s reins, drawing him to a halt. he                
stared up then, studying my face.                                                  
“corwin, what happened up there, anyway? what did you learn?”                      
i hesitated. in truth, what had i learned in the city in the sky? no one           
was certain as to the mechanism behind the visions of tir-na nog’th. it            
could well be, as we have sometimes suspected, that the place simply               
served to objectify one’s unspoken fears and desires, mixing them perhaps          
with unconscious guesswork. sharing conclusions and reasonably based               
conjectures was one thing. suspicions engendered by something unknown              
were likely better retained than given currency. still, that arm was solid         
enough…                                                                            
“i told you,” i said, “that i had knocked that arm off the ghost of                
benedict. obviously, we were fighting.”                                            
“you see it then as an omen that you and benedict will eventually be in            
conflict?”                                                                         
“perhaps.”                                                                         
“you were shown a reason for it, weren’t you?”                                     
“okay,” i said, finding a sigh without trying.                                     
“yes. it was indicated that dara was indeed related to benedict—a thing            
which may well be correct. it is also quite possible, if it is true, that he is    
unaware of it. therefore, we keep quiet about it until we can verify it or         
discount it. understood?”                                                          
“of course. but how could this thing be?”                                          
“just as she said.”                                                                
“great-granddaughter?”                                                             
i nodded.                                                                          
“by whom?”                                                                         
“the hellmaid we knew only by reputation—lintra, the lady who cost                 
him his arm.”                                                                      
“but that battle was only a recent thing.”                                         
“time flows differently in different realms of shadow, ganelon. in the             
farther reaches—it would not be impossible.”                                       
he shook his head and relaxed his grip on the reins.                               
“corwin, i really think benedict should know about this,” he said. “if it          
is true, you ought to give him a chance to prepare himself rather than let         
him discover it of a sudden. you people are such an infertile lot that             
paternity seems to hit you harder than it does others. look at random. for         
years, he had disowned his son, and now—i’ve a feeling he’d risk his life          
for him.”                                                                          
“so do i,” i said. “now forget the first part but carry the second one a           
step farther in the case of benedict.”                                             
“you think he would take dara’s side against amber?”                               
“i would rather avoid presenting him with the choice by not letting him            
know that it exists—if it exists.”                                                 
“i think you do him a disservice. he is hardly an emotional infant. get            
hold of him on the trump and tell him your suspicions. that way, at least,         
he can be thinking about it, rather than have him risk some sudden                 
confrontation unprepared.”                                                         
“he would not believe me. you have seen how he gets whenever i                     
mention dara.”                                                                     
“that in itself may say something. possibly he suspects what might                 
have happened and rejects it so vehemently because he would have it                
otherwise.”                                                                        
“right now it would just widen a rift i am trying to heal.”                        
“your holding back on him now may serve to rupture it completely                   
when he finds out.”                                                                
“no. i believe i know my brother better than you do.”                              
he released the reins.                                                             
“very well,” he said. “i hope you are right.”                                      
i did not answer, but started firedrake to moving once more. there was             
an unspoken understanding between us that ganelon could ask me anything            
he wanted, and it also went without saying that i would listen to any advice       
he had to offer me. this was partly because his position was unique. we            
were not related. he was no amberite. the struggles and problems of                
amber were his only by choice. we had been friends and then enemies long           
ago, and finally, more recently, friends again and allies in a battle in his       
adopted land. that matter concluded, he had asked to come with me, to help         
me deal with my own affairs and those of amber. as i saw it, he owed me            
nothing now, nor i him—if one keeps a scoreboard tally on such matters.            
therefore, it was friendship alone that bound us, a stronger thing than            
bygone debts and points of honor: in other words, a thing which gave him           
the right to bug me on matters such as this, where i might have told even          
random to go to hell once i had made up my mind. i realized i should not           
be irritated when everything that he said was tendered in good faith. most         
likely it was an old military feeling, going back to our earliest relationship     
as well as being tied in with the present state of affairs: i do not like having   
my decisions and orders questioned. probably, i decided, i was irritated           
even more by the fact that he had made some shrewd guesses of late, and            
some fairly sound suggestions based upon them—things i felt i ought to             
have caught myself. no one likes to admit to a resentment based on                 
something like that. still… was that all? a simple projection of                   
dissatisfaction over a few instances of personal inadequacy? an old army           
reflex as to the sanctity of my decisions? or was it something deeper that         
had been bothering me and was just now coming to the surface?                      
“corwin,” ganelon said, “i’ve been doing some thinking…”                           
i sighed.                                                                          
“yes?”                                                                             
“…about random’s son. the way your crowd heals, i suppose it is                    
possible that he might have survived and still be about.”                          
“i would like to think so.”                                                        
“do not be too hasty.”                                                             
“what do you mean?”                                                                
“i gather he had very little contact with amber and the rest of the                
family, growing up in rebma the way that he did.”                                  
“that is the way i understand it, too.”                                            
“in fact, outside of benedict—and llewella, back in rebma—the only                 
other one he apparently had contact with would have been the one who               
stabbed him—bleys, brand, or fiona. it has occurred to me that he                  
probably has a pretty distorted view of the family.”                               
“distorted,” i said, “but maybe not unwarranted, if i see what you are             
getting at.”                                                                       
“i think you do. it seems conceivable that he is not only afraid of the            
family, but may have it in for the lot of you.”                                    
“it is possible,” i said.                                                          
“do you think he could have thrown in with the enemy?”                             
i shook my head.                                                                   
“not if he knows they are the tools of the crowd that tried to kill him.”          
“but are they? i wonder…? you say brand got scared and tried to back               
out of whatever arrangement they had with the black road gang. if they are         
that strong, i wonder whether fiona and bleys might not have become their          
tools? if this were the case, i could see martin angling for something which       
gave him power over them.”                                                         
“too elaborate a structure of guesses,” i said.                                    
“the enemy seems to know a lot about you.”                                         
“true, but they had a couple traitors to give them lessons.”                       
“could they have given them everything you say dara knew?”                         
“that is a good point,” i said, “but it is hard to say.”                           
except for the business about the tecys, which occurred to me                      
immediately. i decided to keep that to myself for the moment though, to            
find out what he was leading up to, rather than going off on a tangent. so,        
“martin was hardly in a position to tell them much about amber,” i said.           
ganelon was silent for a moment. then, “have you had a chance to                   
check on the business i asked you about that night at your tomb?” he said.         
“what business?”                                                                   
“whether the trumps could be bugged,” he said. “now that we know                   
martin had a deck…”                                                                
it was my turn to be silent while a small family of moments crossed my             
path, single file, from the left, sticking their tongues out at me.                
“no,” i said then. “i haven’t had a chance.”                                       
we proceeded on for quite a distance before he said, “corwin, the night            
you brought brand back…?”                                                          
“yes?”                                                                             
“you say you accounted for everyone later, in trying to figure out who it          
was that stabbed you, and that any of them would have been hard put to pull        
the stunt in the time involved.”                                                   
“oh,” i said, “and oh.”                                                            
he nodded.                                                                         
“now you have another relative to think about. he may lack the family              
finesse only because he is young and unpracticed.”                                 
sitting there in my mind, i gestured back at the silent parade of                  
moments that crossed between amber and then.                                       
                                                                      
chapter 4                                                                          
she asked who it was when i knocked and i told her.                                
“just a moment”                                                                    
i heard her footsteps and then the door swung in. vialle is only a little          
over five feet tall and quite slim. brunette, fine-featured, very soft-spoken.     
she was wearing red. her sightless eyes looked through me, reminding me            
of darkness past, of pain.                                                         
“random,” i said, “asked me to tell you that he would be delayed a little          
longer, but that there was nothing to worry about.”                                
“please come in,” she said, stepping aside and drawing the door the rest           
of the way open.                                                                   
i did. i did not want to, but i did. i had not intended to take random’s           
request literally—that i tell her what had happened and where he had gone.         
i had meant simply to tell her what i had already said, nothing more. it was       
not until we had ridden our separate ways that i realized exactly what             
random’s request had amounted to: he had just asked me to go tell his              
wife, to whom i had never spoken more than half a dozen words, that he             
had taken off to go looking for his illegitimate son—the lad whose mother,         
morganthe, had committed suicide, a thing for which random had been                
punished by being forced to marry vialle. the fact that the marriage had           
somehow worked beautifully was something which still amazed me. i had              
no desire to dispense a load of awkward tidings, and as i moved into the           
room i sought alternatives.                                                        
i passed a bust of random set on a high shelf on the wall to my left. i            
had actually gone by before it registered that my brother was indeed the           
subject. across the room, i saw her workbench. turning back, i studied the         
bust.                                                                              
“i did not realize that you sculpted,” i said.                                     
“yes.”                                                                             
casting my gaze about the apartment, i quickly located other examples              
of her work. “quite good,” i said.                                                 
“thank you. won’t you sit down?”                                                   
i lowered myself into a large, high-armed chair, which proved more                 
comfortable than it had looked. she seated herself on a low divan to my            
right, curling her legs beneath her.                                               
“may i get you something to eat, or to drink?”                                     
“no thanks. i can only stay a short while. what it is, is that random,             
ganelon, and i had gotten a bit sidetracked on the way home, and after that        
delay we met with benedict for a time. the upshot of it was that random            
and benedict had to make another small journey.”                                   
“how long will he be away?”                                                        
“probably overnight. maybe a bit longer. if it is going to be much                 
longer he will probably call back on someone’s trump, and we’ll let you            
know.”                                                                             
my side began to throb and i rested my hand upon it, massaging it                  
gently.                                                                            
“random has told me many things about you,” she said.                              
i chuckled.                                                                        
“are you certain you would not care for something to eat? it would be              
no trouble.”                                                                       
“did he tell you that i am always hungry?”                                         
she laughed.                                                                       
“no. but if you have been as active as you say, i would guess that you             
did not take time for lunch.”                                                      
“in that you would be only half-correct. all right. if you’ve a spare              
piece of bread lying about it might do me some good to gnaw on it.”                
“fine. just a moment.”                                                             
she rose and departed into the next room. i took the opportunity to                
scratch heartily all about my wound where it was suddenly itching fit to           
kill. i had accepted her hospitality partly for this reason and partly because     
of the realization that i actually was hungry. only a little later it struck me    
that she could not have seen me attacking my side as i was. her sure               
movements, her confident manner, had relaxed my awareness of her                   
blindness. good. it pleased me that she was able to carry it so well.              
i heard her humming a tune: “the ballad of the water crossers,” the                
song of amber’s great merchant navy. amber is not noted for manufacture,           
and agriculture has never been our forte. but our ships sail the shadows,          
plying between anywhere and anywhere, dealing in anything. just about              
every male amberite, noble or otherwise, spends some time in the fleet.            
those of the blood laid down the trade routes long ago that other vessels          
might follow, the seas of a double dozen worlds in every captain’s head. i         
had assisted in this in times gone by, and though my involvement had never         
been so deep as gerard’s or caine’s, i had been mightily moved by the              
forces of the deep and the spirit of the men who crossed it.                       
after a while, vialle came in bearing a tray heavy with bread, meat,               
cheese, fruit, and a flask of wine. she set it upon a table near at hand.          
“you mean to feed a regiment?” i asked.                                            
“best to be safe.”                                                                 
“thanks. won’t you join me?”                                                       
“a piece of fruit, perhaps,” she said.                                             
her fingers sought for a second, located an apple. she returned to the             
divan.                                                                             
“random tells me you wrote that song,” she said.                                   
“that was a very long time ago, vialle.”                                           
“have you composed any recently?”                                                  
i began to shake my head, caught myself, said, “no. that part of me                
is… resting.”                                                                      
“pity. it is lovely.”                                                              
“random is the real musician in the family.”                                       
“yes, he is very good. but performance and composition are two                     
different things.”                                                                 
“true. one day when things have eased up… tell me, are you happy                   
here in amber? is everything to your liking? is there anything that you            
need?”                                                                             
she smiled.                                                                        
“all that i need is random. he is a good man.”                                     
i was strangely moved to hear her speak of him in this fashion.                    
“then i am happy for you,” i said. and, “younger, smaller… he might                
have had it a bit rougher than the rest of us,” i went on. “nothing quite as       
useless as another prince when there is already a crowd of them about. i           
was as guilty as the rest. bleys and i once stranded him for two days on an        
islet to the south of here…”                                                       
“…and gerard went and got him when he learned of it,” she said. “yes,              
he told me. it must bother you if you remember it after all this time.”            
“it must have made an impression on him, too.”                                     
“no, he forgave you long ago. he told it as a joke. also, he drove a               
spike through the heel of your boot—pierced your foot when you put it on.”         
“then it was random! i’ll be damned! i had always blamed julian for                
that one.”                                                                         
“that one bothers random.”                                                         
“how long ago all of this was…” i said.                                            
i shook my head and continued eating. hunger seized me and she gave                
me several minutes of silence in which to get the upper hand on it. when i         
had, i felt compelled to say something.                                            
“that is better. much better,” i began. “it was a peculiar and trying              
night that i spent in the skycity.”                                                
“did you receive omens of a useful nature?”                                        
“i do not know how useful they might prove. on the other hand, i                   
suppose i’d rather have had them than not. have there been any interesting         
happenings hereabouts?”                                                            
“a servant tells me your brother brand continues to rally. he ate well             
this morning, which is encouraging.”                                               
“true,” i said. “true. it would seem he is out of danger.”                         
“likely. it—it is a terrible series of happenings to which you have all            
been subjected. i am sorry. i was hoping you might obtain some indication          
of an upturn in your affairs during the night you spent in tir-na nog’th.”         
“it does not matter,” i said. “i am not that sure of the value of the thing.”      
“then why—oh.”                                                                     
i studied her with renewed interest. her face still betrayed nothing, but          
her right hand twitched, tapping and plucking at the material of the divan.        
then, as with a sudden awareness of its eloquence, she stilled it. she was         
obviously a person who had answered her own question and wished now                
she had done it in silence.                                                        
“yes,” i said, “i was stalling. you are aware of my injury.”                       
she nodded.                                                                        
“i am not angry with random for having told you,” i said. “his                     
judgment has always been acute and geared to defense. i see no reason not          
to rely on it myself. i must inquire as to how much he has told you,               
however, both for your own safety and my peace of mind. for there are              
things i suspect but have not yet spoken.”                                         
“i understand. it is difficult to assess a negative—the things he might            
have left out, i mean—but he tells me most things. i know your story and           
most of the others. he keeps me aware of events, suspicions, conjectures.”         
“thank you,” i said, taking a sip of. the wine. “it makes it easier for me         
to speak then, seeing how things are with you. i am going to tell you              
everything that happened from breakfast till now…”                                 
so i did.                                                                          
she smiled occasionally as i spoke, but she did not interrupt. when i              
had finished, she asked, “you thought that mention of martin would upset           
me?”                                                                               
“it seemed possible,” i told her.                                                  
“no,” she said. “you see, i knew martin in rebma, when he was but a                
small boy. i was there while he was growing up. i liked him then. even if he       
were not random’s son he would still be dear to me. i can only be pleased          
with random’s concern and hope that it has come in time to benefit them            
both.”                                                                             
i shook my head.                                                                   
“i do not meet people like you too often,” i said. “i am glad that i               
finally have.”                                                                     
she laughed, then said, “you were without sight for a long while.”                 
“yes.”                                                                             
“it can embitter a person, or it can give him a greater joy in those things        
which he does have.”                                                               
i did not have to think back over my feelings from those days of                   
blindness to know that i was a person of the first sort, even discounting the      
circumstances under which i had suffered it. i am sorry, but that is the way       
that i am, and i am sorry.                                                         
“true,” i said. “you are fortunate.”                                               
“it is really only a state of mind—a thing a lord of shadow can easily             
appreciate.”                                                                       
she rose.                                                                          
“i have always wondered as to your appearance,” she said. “random                  
has described you, but that is different. may i?”                                  
“of course.”                                                                       
she approached and placed her finger tips upon my face. delicately, she            
traced my features.                                                                
“yes,” she said, “you are much as i had thought you would be. and i                
feel the tension in you. it has been there for a long while, has it not?”          
“in some form or other, i suppose, ever since my return to amber.”                 
“i wonder,” she said, “whether you might have been happier before you              
regained your memory.”                                                             
“it is one of those impossible questions,” i said. “i might also be dead if        
i had not. but putting that part aside for a moment, in those times there was      
still a thing that drove me, that troubled me every day. i was constantly          
looking for ways to discover who i really was, what i was.”                        
“but were you happier, or less happy, than you are now?”                           
“neither,” i said. “things balance out. it is, as you suggested, a state of        
mind. and even if it were not so, i could never go back to that other life,        
now that i know who i am, now that i have found amber.”                            
“why not?”                                                                         
“why do you ask me these things?”                                                  
“i want to understand you,” she said. “ever since i first heard of you             
back in rebma, even before random told me stories, i wondered what it              
was that drove you. now i’ve the opportunity—no right, of course, just the         
opportunity—i felt it worth speaking out of turn and order beyond my               
station simply to ask you.”                                                        
a half-chuckle caught me.                                                          
“fairly taken,” i said. “i will see whether i can be honest. hatred drove          
me at first—hatred for my brother eric—and my desire for the throne. had           
you asked me on my return which was the stronger, i would have said that it        
was the summons of the throne. now, though… now i would have to admit              
that it was actually the other way around. i had not realized it until this        
moment, but it is true. but eric is dead and there is nothing left of what i       
felt then. the throne remains, but now i find that my feelings toward it are       
mixed. there is a possibility that none of us has a right to it under present      
circumstances, and even if all family objections were removed i would not          
take it at this time. i would have to see stability restored to the realm and a    
number of questions answered first.”                                               
“even if these things showed that you may not have the throne?”                    
“even so.”                                                                         
“then i begin to understand.”                                                      
“what? what is there to understand?”                                               
“lord corwin, my knowledge of the philosophical basis of these things              
is limited, but it is my understanding that you are able to find anything you      
wish within shadow. this has troubled me for a long while, and i never             
fully understood random’s explanations. if you wished, could not each of           
you walk in shadow and find yourself another amber—like this one in all            
respects, save that you ruled there or enjoyed whatever other status you           
might desire?”                                                                     
“yes, we can locate such places,” i said.                                          
“then why is this not done, to have an end of strife?”                             
“it is because a place could be found which seemed to be the same—but              
that would be all. we are a part of this amber as surely as it is a part of us.    
any shadow of amber would have to be populated with shadows of                     
ourselves to seem worth while. we could even except the shadow of our              
own person should we choose to move into a ready realm. however, the               
shadow folk would not be exactly like the other people here. a shadow is           
never precisely like that which casts it. these little differences add up. they    
are actually worse than major ones. it would amount to entering a nation of        
strangers. the best mundane comparison which occurs to me is an                    
encounter with a person who strongly resembles another person you know.            
you keep expecting him to act like your acquaintance; worse yet, you have          
a tendency to act toward him as you would toward that other. you face him          
with a certain mask and his responses are not appropriate. it is an                
uncomfortable feeling. i never enjoy meeting people who remind me of               
other people. personality is the one thing we cannot control in our                
manipulations of shadow. in fact, it is the means by which we can tell one         
another from shadows of ourselves. this is why flora could not decide              
about me for so long, back on the shadow earth: my new personality was             
sufficiently different.”                                                           
“i begin to understand,” she said. “it is not just amber for you. it is the        
place plus everything else.”                                                       
“the place plus everything else… that is amber,” i agreed.                         
“you say that your hate died with eric and your desire for the throne has          
been tempered by the consideration of new things you have learned.”                
“that is so.”                                                                      
“then i think i do understand what it is that moves you.”                          
“the desire for stability moves me,” i said, “and something of curiosity           
—and revenge on our enemies…”                                                      
“duty,” she said. “of course.”                                                     
i snorted.                                                                         
“it would be comforting to put such a face on it,” i said. “as it is,              
however, i will not be a hypocrite. i am hardly a dutiful son of amber or of       
oberon.”                                                                           
“your voice makes it plain that you do not wish to be considered one.”             
i closed my eyes, closed them to join her in darkness, to recall for a             
brief while the world where other messages than light waves took                   
precedence. i knew then that she had been right about my voice. why had i          
trodden so heavily on the idea of duty as soon as it was suggested? i like         
credit for being good and clean and noble and high-minded when i have it           
coming, even sometimes when i do not—the same as the next person. what             
bothered me about the notion of duty to amber? nothing. what was it                
then? dad.                                                                         
i no longer owed him anything, least of all duty. ultimately, he was               
responsible for the present state of affairs. he had fathered a great brood of     
us without providing for a proper succession, he had been less than kind to        
all of our mothers and he then expected our devotion and support. he               
played favorites and, in fact, it even seemed he played us off against one         
another. he then got suckered into something he could not handle and left          
the kingdom in a mess. sigmund freud had long ago anesthetized me to any           
normal, generalized feelings of resentment which might operate within the          
family unit. i have no quarrel on those grounds. facts are another matter. i       
did not dislike my father simply because he had given me no reason to like         
him; in truth, it seemed that he had labored in the other direction. enough. i     
realized what it was that bothered me about the notion of duty: its object         
“you are right,” i said, opening my eyes, regarding her, “and i am glad            
that you told me of it.”                                                           
i rose.                                                                            
“give me your hand,” i said.                                                       
she extended her right hand and i raised it to my lips.                            
“thank you,” i said. “it was a good lunch.”                                        
i turned and made my way to the door. when i looked back she had                   
blushed and was smiling, her hand still partly raised, and i began to              
understand the change in random.                                                   
“good luck to you,” she said, the moment my footsteps ceased.                      
“…and you,” i said, and went out quickly.                                          
i had been planning to see brand next, but just could not bring myself to do       
it. for one thing, i did not want to encounter him with my wits dulled by          
fatigue. for another, talking with vialle was the first pleasant thing which       
had happened to me in some time, and just this once i was going to quit            
while i was ahead.                                                                 
i mounted the stairs and walked the corridor to my room, thinking, of              
course, of the night of the knifings as i fitted my new key to my new lock.        
in my bedchamber, i drew the drapes against the afternoon’s light,                 
undressed, and got into bed. as on other occasions of rest after stress with       
more stress pending, sleep eluded me for a time. for a long while i tossed         
and twisted, reliving events of the past several days and some from even           
farther back. when finally i slept, my dreams were an amalgam of the same          
material, including a spell in my old cell, scraping away at the door.             
it was dark when i awoke and i actually felt rested. the tension gone              
out of me, my reverie was much more peaceful. in fact, there was a tiny            
charge of pleasant excitement dancing through the back of my head. it was          
a tip-of-the-tongue imperative, a buried notion that—yes!                          
i sat up. i reached for my clothes, began to dress. i buckled on                   
grayswandir. i folded a blanket and tucked it under my arm. of course…             
my mind felt clear and my side had stopped throbbing. i had no idea                
how long i had slept, and it was hardly worth checking at this point. i had        
something far more important to look into, something which should have             
occurred to me a long while ago—had occurred, as a matter of fact. i had           
actually been staring right at it once, but the crush of time and events had       
ground it from my mind. until now.                                                 
i locked my room behind me and headed for the stairs. candles                      
flickered, and the faded stag who had been dying for centuries on the              
tapestry to my right looked back on the faded dogs who had been pursuing           
him for approximately as long. sometimes my sympathies are with the stag;          
usually though, i am all dog. have to have the thing restored one of these         
days.                                                                              
the stairs and down. no sounds from below. late, then. good. another               
day and we’re still alive. maybe even a trifle wiser. wise enough to realize       
there are many more things we still need to know. hope, though. there’s            
that. a thing i lacked when i squatted in that damned cell, hands pressed          
against my ruined eyes, howling. vialle… i wish i could have spoken with           
you for a few moments in those days. but i learned what i learned in a nasty       
school, and even a milder curriculum would probably not have given me              
your grace. still… hard to say. i have always felt i am more dog than stag,        
more hunter than victim. you might have taught me something that would             
have blunted the bitterness, tempered the hate. but would that have been for       
the best? the hate died with its object and the bitterness, too, has passed—       
but looking back, i wonder whether i would have made it without them to            
sustain me. i am not at all certain that i would have survived my internment       
without my ugly companions to drag me back to life and sanity time and             
again. now i can afford the luxury of an occasional stag thought, but then it      
might have been fatal. i do not truly know, kind lady, and i doubt that i ever     
will.                                                                              
stillness on the second floor. a few noises from below. sleep well, lady.          
around, and down again. i wondered whether random had uncovered                    
anything of great moment. probably not, or he or benedict should have              
contacted me by now. unless there was trouble. but no. it is ridiculous to         
shop for worries. the real thing makes itself felt in due course, and i’d          
more than enough to go around. the ground floor.                                   
“will,” i said, and, “rolf.”                                                       
“lord corwin.”                                                                     
the two guards had assumed professional stances on hearing my                      
footsteps. their faces told me that all was well, but i asked for the sake of      
form.                                                                              
“quiet, lord. quiet,” replied the senior.                                          
“very good,” i said, and i continued on, entering and crossing the                 
marble dining hall.                                                                
it would work, i was sure of that, if time and moisture had not totally            
effaced it. and then…                                                              
i entered the long corridor, where the dusty walls pressed close on either         
side. darkness, shadows, my footsteps…                                             
i came to the door at the end, opened it, stepped out onto the platform.           
then down once more, that spiraling way, a light here, a light there, into the     
caverns of kolvir. random had been right, i decided then. if you had               
gouged out everything, down to the level of that distant floor, there would        
be a close correspondence between what was left and the place of that              
primal pattern we had visited this morning.                                        
… on down. twisting and winding through the gloom. the torch and                   
lantern-lit guard station was theatrically stark within it. i reached the floor    
and headed that way.                                                               
“good evening. lord corwin,” said the lean, cadaverous figure who                  
rested against a storage rack, smoking his pipe, grinning around it.               
“good evening, roger. how are things in the nether world?”                         
“a rat, a bat, a spider. nothing much else astir. peaceful.”                       
“you enjoy this duty?”                                                             
he nodded.                                                                         
“i am writing a philosophical romance shot through with elements of                
horror and morbidity. i work on those parts down here.”                            
“fitting, fitting,” i said.                                                        
“i’ll be needing a lantern.”                                                       
he took one from the rack, brought it to flame from his candle.                    
“will it have a happy ending?” i inquired.                                         
he shrugged.                                                                       
“i’ll be happy.”                                                                   
“i mean, does good triumph and hero bed heroine? or do you kill                    
everybody off?”                                                                    
“that’s hardly fair,” he said.                                                     
“never mind. maybe i’ll read it one day.”                                          
“maybe,” he said.                                                                  
i took the lantern and turned away, heading in a direction i had not               
taken in a long while. i discovered that i could still measure the echoes in       
my mind.                                                                           
before too long, i neared the wall, sighted the proper corridor, entered           
it. it was simply a matter of counting my paces then. my feet knew the way.        
the door to my old cell stood partly ajar. i set down the lantern and              
used both hands to open it fully. it gave way grudgingly, moaning as it            
moved. then i raised the lantern, held it high, and entered.                       
my flesh tingled and my stomach clenched itself within me. i began to              
shiver. i had to fight down a strong impulse to bolt and run. i had not            
anticipated such a reaction. i did not want to step away from that heavy           
brassbound door for fear that it would be slammed and bolted behind me. it         
was an instant close to pure terror that the small dirty cell had aroused in       
me. i forced myself to dwell on particulars—the hole which had been my             
latrine, the blackened spot where i had built my fire on that final day. i ran     
my left hand over the inner surface of the door, finding and tracing there the     
grooves i had worn while scraping away with my spoon. i remembered                 
what the activity had done to my hands. i stooped to examine the gouging.          
not nearly so deep as it had seemed at the time, not when compared to the          
total thickness of the door. i realized how much i had exaggerated the             
effects of that feeble effort toward freedom. i stepped past it and regarded       
the wall.                                                                          
faint. dust and moisture had worked to undo it. but i could still discern          
the outlines of the lighthouse of cobra, bordered by four slashes of my old        
spoon handle. the magic was still there, that force which had finally              
transported me to freedom. i felt it without calling upon it.                      
i turned and faced the other wall.                                                 
the sketch which i now regarded had fared less well than that of the               
lighthouse, but then it had been executed with extreme haste by the light of       
my last few matches. i could not even make out all of the details, though          
my memory furnished a few of those which were hidden: it was a view of a           
den or library, bookshelves lining the walls, a desk in the foreground, a          
globe beside the desk. i wondered whether i should risk wiping it clean.           
i set my lantern on the floor, returned to the sketch on the other wall.           
with a corner of my blanket, i gently wiped some dust from a point near the        
base of the lighthouse. the line grew clearer. i wiped it again, exerting a        
little more pressure. unfortunate. i destroyed an inch or so of outline.           
i stepped back and tore a wide strip from the edge of the blanket. i               
folded what remained into a pad and seated myself on it. slowly, carefully         
then, i set to work on the lighthouse. i had to get an exact feeling for the       
work before i tried cleaning the other one.                                        
half an hour later i stood up and stretched, bent and massaged life back           
into my legs. what remained of the lighthouse was clean. unfortunately, i          
had destroyed about 20 per cent of the sketch before i developed a sense of        
the wall’s texture and an appropriate stroke across it. i doubted that i was       
going to improve any further.                                                      
the lantern sputtered as i moved it. i unfolded the blanket, shook it out,         
tore off a fresh strip. making up a new pad, i knelt before the other sketch       
and set to work.                                                                   
a while later i had uncovered what remained of it. i had forgotten the             
skull on the desk until a careful stroke revealed it once again—and the            
angle of the far wall, and a tall candlestick… i drew back. it would be risky      
to do any more rubbing. probably unnecessary, also. it seemed about as             
entire as it had been.                                                             
the lantern was flickering once again. cursing roger for not checking              
the kerosene level, i stood and held the light at shoulder level off to my left.   
i put everything from my mind but the scene before me.                             
it gained something of perspective as i stared. a moment later and it              
was totally three-dimensional and had expanded to fill my entire field of          
vision. i stepped forward then and rested the lantern on the edge of the           
desk.                                                                              
i cast my eyes about the place. there were bookshelves on all four                 
walls. no windows. two doors at the far end of the room, right and left,           
across from one another, one closed, the other partly ajar. there was a long,      
low table covered with books and papers beside the opened door. bizarre            
curios occupied open spaces on the shelves and odd niches and recesses in          
the walls—bones, stones, pottery, inscribed tablets, lenses, wands,                
instruments of unknown function. the huge rug resembled an ardebil. i              
took a step toward that end of the room and the lantern sputtered again. i         
turned and reached for it. at that moment, it failed.                              
i growled an obscenity and lowered my hand. then i turned, slowly, to              
check for any possible light sources. something resembling a branch of             
coral shone faintly on a shelf across the room and a pale line of illumination     
occurred at the base of the closed door. i abandoned the lantern and crossed       
the room.                                                                          
i opened the door as quietly as i could. the room it let upon was                  
deserted, a small, windowless living place faintly lit by the still smoldering     
embers in its single, recessed hearth. the room’s walls were of stone and          
they arched above me. the fireplace was a possibly natural niche in the            
wall to my left. a large, armored door was set in the far wall, a big key          
partly turned in its lock.                                                         
i entered, taking a candle from a nearby table, and moved toward the               
fireplace to give it a light. as i knelt and sought a flame among the embers,      
i heard a soft footfall in the vicinity of the doorway.                            
turning, i saw him just beyond the threshold. about five feet in height,           
hunchbacked. his hair and beard were even longer than i remembered.                
dworkin wore a nightshirt which reached to his ankles. he carried an oil           
lamp, his dark eyes peering across its sooty chimney.                              
“oberon” he said, “is it finally time?”                                            
“what time is that?” i asked softly.                                               
he chuckled.                                                                       
“what other? time to destroy the world, of course!”                                
                                                                      
chapter 5                                                                          
i kept the light away from my face, kept my voice low.                             
“not quite,” i said. “not quite.”                                                  
he sighed.                                                                         
“you remain unconvinced.”                                                          
he looked forward and cocked his head, peering down at me.                         
“why must you spoil things?” he said.                                              
“i’ve spoiled nothing.”                                                            
he lowered the lamp. i turned my head again, but he finally got a good             
look at my face. he laughed.                                                       
“funny. funny, funny, funny,” he said. “you come as the young lord                 
corwin, thinking to sway me with family sentiment. why did you not                 
choose brand or bleys? it was clarissa’s lot served us best.”                      
i shrugged and stood.                                                              
“yes and no,” i said, determined now to feed him ambiguities for so                
long as he’d accept them and respond. something of value might emerge,             
and it seemed an easy way to keep him in a good humor.                             
“and yourself?” i continued. “what face would you put on things?”                  
“why, to win your good will i’ll match you,” he said, and then he began            
to laugh.                                                                          
he threw his head back, and as his laughter rang about me a change                 
came over him. his stature seemed to increase, and his face luffed like a sail     
cut too close to the wind. the hump on his back was diminished as he               
straightened and stood taller. his features rearranged themselves and his          
beard darkened. by then it was obvious that he was somehow redistributing          
his body mass, for the nightshirt which had reached his ankles was now             
midway up his shins. he breathed deeply and his shoulders widened. his             
arms lengthened, his bulging abdomen narrowed, tapered. he reached                 
shoulder height on me, then higher. he looked me in the eye. his garment           
reached only to his knees. his hump was totally resorbed. his face gave a          
final twist, his features steadied, were reset. his laughter fell to a chuckle,    
faded, closed with a smirk.                                                        
i regarded a slightly slimmer version of myself.                                   
“sufficient?” he inquired.                                                         
“not half bad,” i said.                                                            
“wait till i toss a couple logs on the fire.”                                      
“i will help you.”                                                                 
“that’s all right.”                                                                
i drew some wood from a rack to the right. any stall served me                     
somewhat, buying reactions for my study. as i was about the work, he               
crossed to a chair and seated himself. when i glanced at him i saw that he         
was not looking at me, but staring into the shadows. i drew out the fire-          
building, hoping that he would say something, anything. eventually, he did.        
“whatever became of the grand design?” he asked.                                   
i did not know whether he was speaking of the pattern or of some                   
master plan of dad’s to which he had been privy. so, “you tell me,” i said.        
he chuckled again.                                                                 
“why not? you changed your mind, that is what happened,” he said.                  
“from what to what—as you see it?”                                                 
“don’t mock me. even you have no right to mock me,” he said. “least                
of all, you.”                                                                      
i got to my feet.                                                                  
“i was not mocking you,” i said.                                                   
i crossed the room to another chair and carried it over to a position near         
the fire, across from dworkin. i seated myself.                                    
“how did you recognize me?” i asked.                                               
“my whereabouts are hardly common knowledge.”                                      
“that is true.”                                                                    
“do many in amber think me dead?”                                                  
“yes, and others suppose you might be traveling off in shadow.”                    
“i see.”                                                                           
“how have you been feeling?”                                                       
he gave me an evil grin.                                                           
“do you mean am i still mad?”                                                      
“you put it more bluntly than i care to.”                                          
“there is a fading, there is an intensifying,” he said. “it comes to me            
and it departs again. for the moment i am almost myself—almost, i say.             
the shock of your visit, perhaps… something is broken in my mind. you              
know that. it cannot be otherwise, though. you know that, too.”                    
“i suppose that i do,” i said. “why don’t you tell me all about it, all over       
again? just the business of talking might make you feel better, might give         
me something i’ve missed. tell me a story.”                                        
another laugh.                                                                     
“anything you like. have you any preferences? my flight from chaos                 
to this small sudden island in the sea of night? my meditations upon the           
abyss? the revelation of the pattern in a jewel hung round the neck of a           
unicorn? my transcription of the design by lightning, blood, and lyre while        
our fathers raged baffled, too late come to call me back while the poem of         
fire ran that first route in my brain, infecting me with the will to form? too     
late! too late… possessed of the abominations born of the disease, beyond          
their aid, their power, i planned and built, captive of my new self. is that the   
tale you’d hear again? or rather i tell you of its cure?”                          
my mind spun at the implications he had just scattered by the fistful. i           
could not tell whether he spoke literally or metaphorically or was simply          
sharing paranoid delusions, but the things that i wanted to hear, had to hear,     
were things closer to the moment. so, regarding the shadowy image of               
myself from which that ancient voice emerged, “tell me of its cure,” i said.       
he braced his finger tips together and spoke through them.                         
“i am the pattern,” he said, “in a very real sense. in passing through my          
mind to achieve the form it now holds, the foundation of amber, it marked          
me as surely as i marked it. i realized one day that i am both the pattern and     
myself, and it was forced to become dworkin in the process of becoming             
itself. there were mutual modifications in the birthing of this place and this     
time, and therein lay our weakness as well as our strength. for it occurred        
to me that damage to the pattern would be damage to myself, and damage             
to myself would be reflected within the pattern. yet i could not be truly          
banned because the pattern protects me, and who but i could harm the               
pattern? a beautiful closed system, it seemed, its weakness totally shielded       
by its strength.”                                                                  
he fell silent. i listened to the fire. i do not know what he listened to.         
then, “i was wrong,” he said. “such a simple matter, too… my blood,                
with which i drew it, could deface it. but it took me ages to realize that the     
blood of my blood could also do this thing. you could use it, you could also       
change it—yea, unto the third generation.”                                         
it did not come to me as a surprise, learning that he was grandsire to us          
all. somehow, it seemed that i had known all along, had known but never            
voiced it. yet… if anything, this raised more questions than it answered.          
collect one generation of ancestry. proceed to confusion. i had less idea          
now than ever before as to what dworkin really was. add to this the fact           
which even he acknowledged: it was a tale told by a madman.                        
“but to repair it…?” i said.                                                       
he smirked, my own face twisting before me.                                        
“have you lost your taste to be a lord of the living void, a king of               
chaos?” he asked.                                                                  
“mayhap,” i replied.                                                               
“by the unicorn, thy mother, i knew it would come to this! the pattern             
is as strong in you as is the greater realm. what then is your desire?”            
“to preserve the realm.”                                                           
he shook his/my head.                                                              
“ ‘twould be simpler to destroy everything and try a new start—as i                
have told you so often before.”                                                    
“i’m stubborn. so tell me again,” i said, attempting to simulate dad’s             
gruffness.                                                                         
he shrugged.                                                                       
“destroy the pattern and we destroy amber—and all of the shadows in                
polar array about it. give me leave to destroy myself in the midst of the          
pattern and we will obliterate it. give me leave by giving me your word that       
you will then take the jewel which contains the essence of order and use it        
to create a new pattern, bright and pure, untainted, drawing upon the stuff        
of your own being while the legions of chaos attempt to distract you on            
every side. promise me that and let me end it, for broken as i am, i would         
rather die for order than live for it. what say you now?”                          
“would it not be better to try mending the one we’ve got than to undo              
the work of eons?”                                                                 
“coward!” he cried, leaping to his feet. “i knew you would say that                
again!”                                                                            
“well, wouldn’t it?”                                                               
he began to pace.                                                                  
“how many times have we been through this?” he asked. “nothing has                 
changed! you are afraid to try it!”                                                
“perhaps,” i said. “but do you not feel that something for which you               
have given so much is worth some effort—some additional sacrifice—if               
there is even a possibility of saving it?”                                         
“you still do not understand,” he said. “i cannot but think that a                 
damaged thing should be destroyed—and hopefully replaced. the nature of            
my personal injury is such that i cannot envision repair. i am damaged in          
just this fashion. my feelings are foreordained.”                                  
“if the jewel can create a new pattern, why will it not serve to repair the        
old one, end our troubles, heal your spirit?”                                      
he approached and stood before me.                                                 
“where is your memory?” he said. “you know that it would be                        
infinitely more difficult to repair the damage than it would be to start over      
again. even the jewel could more easily destroy it than repair it. have your       
forgotten what it is like out there?” he gestured toward the wall behind him.      
“do you want to go and look at it again?”                                          
“yes,” i said. “i would like that. let’s go.”                                      
i rose and looked down at him. his control over his form had begun                 
slipping when he had grown angry. he had already lost three or four inches         
in height, the image of my face was melting back into his gnomelike                
features, and a noticeable bulge was growing between his shoulders, had            
already been visible when he had gestured.                                         
his eyes widened and he studied my face.                                           
“you really mean it,” he said after a moment. “all right, then. let us             
go.”                                                                               
he turned and moved toward the big metal door. i followed him. he                  
used both hands to turn the key. then he threw his weight against it. i            
moved to help him, but he brushed me aside with extraordinary strength             
before giving the door a final shove. it made a grating noise and moved            
outward into a fully opened position. i was immediately struck by a strange,       
somehow familiar odor.                                                             
dworkin stepped through and paused. he located what looked to be a                 
long staff leaning against the wall off to his right. he struck it several times   
against the ground and its upper end began to glow. it lit up the area fairly      
well, revealing a narrow tunnel into which he now advanced. i followed             
him and it widened before too long, so that i was able to come abreast of          
him. the odor grew stronger, and i could almost place it. it had been              
something fairly recent…                                                           
it was close to eighty paces before our way took a turn to the left and            
upward. we passed then through a little appendix like area. it was strewn          
with broken bones, and a large metal ring was set in the rock a couple of          
feet above the floor. affixed thereto was a glittering chain, which fell to the    
floor and trailed on ahead like a line of molten droplets cooling in the           
gloom.                                                                             
our way narrowed again after that and dworkin took the lead once                   
more. after a brief time, he turned an abrupt corner and i heard him               
muttering. i nearly ran into him when i made the turn myself. he was               
crouched down and groping with his left hand inside a shadowy cleft. when          
i heard the soft cawing noise and saw that the chain vanished into the             
opening i realized what it was and where we were.                                  
“good wixer,” i heard him say. “i am not going far. it is all right, good          
wixer. here is something to chew on.”                                              
from where he had fetched whatever he tossed the beast, i do not know.             
but the purple griffin, which i had now advanced far enough to glimpse as          
it stirred within its lair, accepted the offering with a toss of its head and a    
series of crunching noises. dworkin grinned up at me.                              
“surprised?” he asked.                                                             
“at what?”                                                                         
“you thought i was afraid of him. you thought i would never make                   
friends with him. you set him out here to keep me in there—away from the           
pattern.”                                                                          
“did i ever say that?”                                                             
“you did not have to. i am not a fool.”                                            
“have it your way,” i said.                                                        
he chuckled, rose, and continued on along the passageway.                          
i followed and it grew level underfoot once again. the ceiling rose and            
the way widened. at length, we came to the cave mouth. dworkin stood for           
a moment silhouetted, staff raised before him. it was night outside, and a         
clean salt smell swept the musk from my nostrils.                                  
another moment, and he moved forward once more, passing into a                     
world of sky—candles and blue velour’s. continuing after him, i had                
gasped briefly at that amazing view. it was not simply that the stars in the       
moonless, cloudless sky blazed with a preternatural brilliance, nor that the       
distinction between sky and sea had once again been totally obliterated. it        
was that the pattern glowed an almost acetylene blue by that skysea, and all       
of the stars above, beside, and below were arrayed with a geometric                
precision, forming a fantastic, oblique latticework which, more than               
anything else, gave the impression that we hung in the midst of a cosmic           
web where the pattern was the true center, the rest of the radiant meshwork        
a precise consequence of its existence, configuration, position.                   
dworkin continued on down to the pattern, right up to the edge beside              
the darkened area. he waved his staff over it and turned to look at me just        
as i came near.                                                                    
“there you are,” he announced, “the hole in my mind. i can no longer               
think through it, only around it. i no longer know what must be done to            
repair something i now lack. if you think that you can do it, you must be          
willing to lay yourself open to instant destruction each time you depart the       
pattern to cross the break. not destruction by the dark portion. destruction       
by the pattern itself when you break the circuit. the jewel may or may not         
sustain you. i do not know. but it will not grow easier. it will become more       
difficult with each circuit, and your strength will be lessening all the while.    
the last time we discussed it you were afraid. do you mean to say you have         
grown bolder since then?”                                                          
“perhaps,” i said. “you see no other way?”                                         
“i know it can be done starting with a clean slate, because once i did it          
so. beyond that, i see no other way. the longer you wait the more the              
situation worsens. why not fetch the jewel and lend me your blade, son? i          
see no better way.”                                                                
“no,” i said. “i must know more. tell me again how the damage was                  
done.”                                                                             
“i still do not know which of your children shed our blood on this spot,           
if this is what you mean. it was done. let it go at that. our darker natures       
came forth strongly in them. it must be that they are too close to the chaos       
from which we sprang, growing without the exercises of will we endured in          
defeating it. i had thought that the ritual of traveling the pattern might         
suffice for them. i could think of nothing stronger. yet it failed. they strike    
out against everything. they seek to destroy the pattern itself.”                  
“if we succeed in making a fresh start, might not these events simply              
repeat themselves?”                                                                
“i do not know. but what choice have we other than failure and a return            
to chaos?”                                                                         
“what will become of them if we try for a new beginning?”                          
he was silent for a long while. then he shrugged. “i cannot tell.”                 
“what would another generation have been like?”                                    
he chuckled.                                                                       
“how can such a question be answered? i have no idea.”                             
i withdrew the mutilated trump and passed it to him. he regarded it                
near the blaze of his staff.                                                       
“i believe it is random’s son martin,” i said, “he whose blood was                 
spilled here. i have no idea whether he still lives. what do you think he          
might have amounted to?”                                                           
he looked back out over the pattern.                                               
“so this is the object which decorated it,” he said. “how did you fetch it         
forth?”                                                                            
“it was gotten,” i said. “it is not your work, is it?”                             
“of course not. i have never set eyes on the boy. but this answers your            
question, does it not? if there is another generation, your children will          
destroy it.”                                                                       
“as we would destroy them?”                                                        
he met my eyes and peered.                                                         
“is it that you are suddenly becoming a doting father?” he asked.                  
“if you did not prepare that trump, who did?”                                      
he glanced down and flicked it with his fingernail.                                
“my best pupil. your son brand. that is his style. see what they do as             
soon as they gain a little power? would any of them offer their lives to           
preserve the realm, to restore the pattern?”                                       
“probably,” i said. “probably benedict, gerard, random, corwin…”                   
“benedict has the mark of doom upon him, gerard possesses the will                 
but not the wit, random lacks courage and determination. corwin… is he             
not out of favor and out of sight?”                                                
my thoughts returned to our last meeting, when he had helped me to                 
escape from my cell to cabra. it occurred to me that he might have had             
second thoughts concerning that, not having been aware of the                      
circumstances which had put me there.                                              
“is that why you have taken his form?” he went on. “is this some                   
manner of rebuke? are you testing me again?”                                       
“he is neither out of favor nor sight,” i said, “though he has enemies             
among the family and elsewhere. he would attempt anything to preserve              
the realm. how do you see his chances?”                                            
“has he not been away for a long while?”                                           
“yes.”                                                                             
“then he might have changed. i do not know.”                                       
“i believe he is changed. i know that he is willing to try.”                       
he stared at me again, and he kept staring.                                        
“you are not oberon,” he said at length.                                           
“no.”                                                                              
“you are he whom i see before me.”                                                 
“no more, no less.”                                                                
“i see… i did not realize that you knew of this place.”                            
“i didn’t, until recently. the first time that i came here i was led by the        
unicorn.”                                                                          
his eyes widened.                                                                  
“that is—very—interesting,” he said. “it has been so long…”                        
“what of my question?”                                                             
“eh? question? what question?”                                                     
“my chances. do you think i might be able to repair the pattern?”                  
he advanced slowly, and reaching up, placed his right hand on my                   
shoulder. the staff tilted in his other hand as he did so; its blue light flared   
within a foot of my face, but i felt no heat. he looked into my eyes.              
“you have changed,” he said, after a time.                                         
“enough,” i asked, “to do the job?”                                                
he looked away.                                                                    
“perhaps enough to make it worth trying,” he said, “even if we are                 
foredoomed to failure.”                                                            
“will you help me?”                                                                
“i do not know,” he said, “that i will be able. this thing with my moods,          
my thoughts—it comes and it goes. even now, i feel some of my control              
slipping away. the excitement, perhaps… we had best get back inside.”              
i heard a clinking noise at my back. when i turned, the griffin was                
there, his head swinging slowly from left to right, his tail from right to left,   
his tongue darting. he began to circle us, halting when he came to a               
position between dworkin and the pattern.                                          
“he knows,” dworkin said. “he can sense it when i begin to change.                 
he will not let me near the pattern then… good wixer. we are returning             
now. it is all right… come, corwin.”                                               
we headed back toward the cave mouth and wixer followed, a clink for               
every pace.                                                                        
“the jewel,” i said, “the jewel of judgment… you say that it is                    
necessary for the repair of the pattern?”                                          
“yes,” he said. “it would have to be borne the entire distance through             
the pattern, reinscribing the original design in the places where it has been      
broken. this could only be done by one who is attuned to the jewel,                
though.”                                                                           
“i am attuned to the jewel,” i said.                                               
“how?” he asked, halting.                                                          
wixer made a cackling noise behind us, and we resumed walking.                     
“i followed your written instructions—and eric’s verbal ones,” i said. “i          
took it with me to the center of the pattern and projected myself through it.”     
“i see,” he said. “how did you obtain it?”                                         
“from eric, on his deathbed.”                                                      
we entered the cave.                                                               
“you have it now?”                                                                 
“i was forced to cache it in a place off in shadow.”                               
“i would suggest you retrieve it quickly and bring it here or take it back         
to the palace. it is best kept near the center of things.”                         
“why is that?”                                                                     
“it tends to have a distorting effect on shadows if it lies too long among         
them.”                                                                             
“distorting? in what fashion?”                                                     
“there is no way to tell, in advance. it depends entirely upon the                 
locale.”                                                                           
we rounded a corner, continued on back through the gloom.                          
“what does it mean,” i said, “when you are wearing the jewel and                   
everything begins to slow down about you? fiona warned me that this was            
dangerous, but she was not certain why.”                                           
“it means that you have reached the bounds of your own existence, that             
your energies will shortly be exhausted, that you will die unless you do           
something quickly.”                                                                
“what is that?”                                                                    
“begin to draw power from the pattern itself—the primal pattern within             
the jewel.”                                                                        
“how is this achieved?”                                                            
“you must surrender to it, release yourself, blot out your identity, erase         
the bounds which separate you from everything else.”                               
“it sounds easier said than done.”                                                 
“but it can be done, and it is the only way.”                                      
i shook my head. we moved on, coming at last to the big door. dworkin              
extinguished the staff and leaned it against the wall. we entered and he           
secured the door. wixer had stationed himself just outside.                        
“you will have to leave now,” dworkin said.                                        
“but there are many more things that i must ask you, and some that i               
would like to tell you.”                                                           
“my thoughts grow meaningless, and your words would be wasted.                     
tomorrow night, or the next, or the next. hurry! go!”                              
“why the rush?”                                                                    
“i may harm you when the change comes over me. i am holding it back                
by main will now. depart!”                                                         
“i do not know how. i know how to get here, but—”                                  
“there are all manner of special trumps in the desk in the next room.              
take the light! go anywhere! get out of here!”                                     
i was about to protest that i hardly feared any physical violence he               
could muster, when his features began to flow like melting wax and he              
somehow seemed much larger and longer-limbed than he had been. seizing             
the light, i fled the room, a sudden chill upon me.                                
… to the desk. i tore open the drawer and snatched at some trumps                  
which lay scattered within it. i heard footsteps then, of something entering       
the room behind me, coming from the chamber i had just departed. they              
did not seem like the footsteps of a man. i did not look back. instead, i          
raised the cards before me and regarded the one on top. it was an unfamiliar       
scene, but i opened my mind immediately and reached for it. a mountain             
crag, something indistinct beyond it, a strangely stippled sky, a scattering of    
stars to the left                                                                  
… the card was alternately hot and cold to my touch, and a heavy wind              
seemed to come blowing through it as i stared, somehow rearranging the             
prospect.                                                                          
from right behind me then, the heavily altered but still recognizable              
voice of dworkin spoke: “fool! you have chosen the land of your doom!”             
a great clawlike hand—black, leathery, gnarled—reached over my                     
shoulder, as if to snatch the card away. but the vision seemed ready, and i        
rushed forward into it, turning the card from me as soon as i realized i had       
made my escape. then i halted and stood stockstill, to let my senses adjust        
to the new locale.                                                                 
i knew. from snatches of legend, bits of family gossip, and from a                 
general feeling which came over me, i knew the place to which i had come.          
it was with full certainty as to identity that i raised my eyes to look upon       
the courts of chaos.                                                               
                                                                      
chapter 6                                                                          
where? the senses are such uncertain things, and now mine were strained            
beyond their limits. the rock on which i stood… if i attempted to fix my           
gaze upon it, it took on the aspect of a pavement on a hot afternoon. it           
seemed to shift and waver, though my footing was undisturbed. and it was           
undecided as to the portion of the spectrum it might call home. it pulsated        
and flashed like the skin of an iguana. looking upward, i beheld a sky such        
as i had never before set eyes upon. at the moment, it was split down the          
middle—half of it of deepest night-black, and the stars danced within it.          
when i say danced, i do not mean twinkled; they cavorted and they shifted          
magnitudes; they darted and they circled; they flared to nova brilliance,          
then faded to nothing. it was a frightening spectacle to behold, and my            
stomach tightened within me as i experienced a profound acrophobia. yet,           
shifting my gaze did little to improve the situation. the other half of the sky    
was like a bottle of colored sands, continuously shaken; belts of orange,          
yellow, red, blue, brown, and purple turned and twisted; patches of green,         
mauve, gray, and dead white came and went, sometimes snaking into                  
belthood, replacing or joining the other writhing entities. and these, too,        
shimmered and wavered, creating impossible sensations of distance and              
nearness. at times, some or all seemed literally sky-high, and then again          
they came to fill the air before me, gauzy, transparent mists, translucent         
swaths or solid tentacles of color. it was not until later that i realized that    
the line which separated the black from the color was advancing slowly             
from my right while retreating to my left. it was as if the entire celestial       
mandala were rotating about a point directly overhead.                             
as to the light source of the brighter half, it simply could not be                
determined. standing there, i looked down upon what at first seemed a              
valley filled with countless explosions of color; but when the advancing           
darkness faced this display away the stars danced and burned within its            
depths as well as above, giving them the impression of a bottomless chasm.         
it was as if i stood at the end of the world, the end of the universe, the end     
of everything. but far, far out from where i stood, something hovered on a         
mount of sheerest black—a blackness itself, but edged and tempered with            
barely perceptible flashes of light. i could not guess at its size, for distance,  
depth, perspective, were absent here. a single edifice? a group? a city? or        
simply a place? the outline varied each time that it fell upon my retina.          
now faint and misty sheets drifted slowly between us, twisting, as if              
long strands of gauze were buoyed by heated air. the mandala ceased its            
turning when it had exactly reversed itself. the colors were behind me now,        
and imperceptible unless i turned my head, an action i had no desire to take.      
it was pleasant standing there, staring at the formlessness from which all         
things eventually emerged… before the pattern, even, this thing was. i             
knew this, dimly but purely, at the very center of my consciousness. i knew        
this, because i was certain that i had been here before. child of the man i        
had become, it seemed that i had been brought here in some distant day—            
whether by dad or dworkin, i could not now recall—and had stood or been            
held in this place or one very near to it, looking out upon the same scene         
with, i am certain, a similar lack of comprehension, a similar sense of            
apprehension. my pleasure was tinged with a nervous excitement, a sense            
of the forbidden, a feeling of dubious anticipation. peculiarly, at that           
moment, there rose in me a longing for the jewel i had had to abandon in           
my compost heap on the shadow earth, the thing dworkin had made so                 
much of. could it be that some part of me sought a defense or at least a           
symbol of resistance against whatever was out there? probably.                     
as i continued to stare, fascinated, across the chasm, it was as if my             
eyes adjusted or the prospect shifted once again, subtly. for now i discerned      
tiny, ghostly forms moving within that place, like slow motion meteors             
along the gauzy strands. i waited, regarding them carefully, courting some         
small understanding of the actions in which they were engaged. at length,          
one of the strands drifted very near. shortly thereafter i had my answer.          
there was a movement. one of the rushing forms grew larger, and i                  
realized that it was following the twisting way that led toward me. in only a      
few moments, it took on the proportions of a horseman. as it came on, it           
assumed a semblance of solidity without losing that ghostly quality which          
seemed to cling to everything which lay before me. a moment later, i               
beheld a naked rider on a hairless horse, both deathly pale, rushing in my         
direction. the rider brandished a bone-white blade; his eyes and the eyes of       
the horse both flashed red. i did not really know whether he saw me,               
whether we existed on the same plane of reality, so unnatural was his mien.        
yet i unsheathed grayswandir and took a step backward as he approached.            
his long white hair shed tiny sparkling motes, and when he turned his              
head i knew that he was coming for me, for then i felt his gaze like a cold        
pressure across the front of my body. i turned sidewise and raised my blade        
to guard.                                                                          
he continued, and i realized that both he and the horse were big, bigger           
even than i had thought. they came on. when they reached the point                 
nearest me—some ten meters, perhaps—the horse reared as the rider drew             
it to a halt. they regarded me then, bobbing and swaying as if on a raft in a      
gently swelling sea.                                                               
“your name!” the rider demanded. “give me your name, who comes to                  
this place!”                                                                       
his voice produced a crackling sensation in my ears. it was all of one             
sound level, loud and without inflection.                                          
i shook my head.                                                                   
“i give my name when i choose, not when i am ordered to,” i said.                  
“who are you?”                                                                     
he gave three short barks, which i took to be a laugh.                             
“i will hale you down and about, where you will cry it out forever.”               
i pointed grayswandir at his eyes.                                                 
“talk is cheap,” i said. “whisky costs money.”                                     
i felt a faint cool sensation just then, as if someone were toying with my         
trump, thinking of me. but it was dim, weak, and i had no attention to             
spare, for the rider had passed some signal to his mount and the beast             
reared. the distance is too great, i decided. but this thought belonged to         
another shadow. the beast plunged ahead toward me, departing the tenuous           
roadway that had been its course.                                                  
its leap bore it to a point far short of my position. but it did not fall          
from there and vanish, as i had hoped. it resumed the motions of galloping,        
and although its progress was not fully commensurate with the action, it           
continued to advance across the abyss at about half-speed.                         
while this was occurring, i saw that in the distance from which it had             
come another figure appeared to be headed my way. nothing to do but                
stand my ground, fight, and hope that i could dispatch this attacker before        
the other was upon me.                                                             
as the rider advanced, his ruddy gaze flicked over my person and halted            
when it fell upon grayswandir. whatever the nature of the mad illumination         
at my back, it had tricked the delicate tracery on my blade to life once more,     
so that that portion of the pattern it bore swam and sparkled along its            
length. the horseman was very near by then, but he drew back on the reins          
and his eyes leaped upward, meeting my own. his nasty grin vanished.               
“i know you!” he said. “you are the one called corwin!”                            
but we had him, me and my ally momentum.                                           
his mount’s front hoofs fell upon the ledge and i rushed forward. the              
beast’s reflexes caused it to seek equal footing for its hind legs despite the     
drawn reins. the rider swung his blade into a guard position as i came on,         
but i cross-stepped and attacked from his left. as he moved his blade cross-       
body, i was already lunging. grayswandir sheared through his pale hide,            
entering beneath the sternum and above the guts.                                   
i wrenched my blade free and gouts of fire poured like blood from his              
wound. his sword arm sagged and his mount uttered a shriek that was                
almost a whistle as the blazing stream fell upon its neck. i danced back as        
the rider slumped forward and the beast, now fully footed, plunged on              
toward me, kicking. i cut again, reflexively, defensively. my blade nicked         
its left foreleg, and it, too, began to burn.                                      
i side-stepped once again as it turned and made for me a second time.              
at that moment, the rider erupted into a pillar of light. the beast bellowed,      
wheeled, and rushed away. without pausing, it plunged over the edge and            
vanished into the abyss, leaving me with the memory of the smoldering              
head of a cat which had addressed me long ago and the chill which always           
accompanied the recollection.                                                      
i was backed against rock, panting. the wispy road had drifted nearer—             
ten feet, perhaps, from the ledge. i had developed a cramp in my left side.        
the second rider was rapidly approaching. he was not pale like the first.          
his hair was dark and there was color in his face. his mount was a properly        
maned sorrel. he bore a cocked and bolted crossbow. i glanced behind me            
and there was no retreat, no crevice into which i might back.                      
i wiped my palm on my trousers and gripped grayswandir by the forte                
of the blade. i turned sideways, so as to present the narrowest target             
possible. i raised my blade between us, hilt level with my head, point             
toward the ground, the only shield i possessed.                                    
the rider came abreast of me and halted at the nearest point on the                
gauzy strip. he raised the crossbow slowly, knowing that if he did not drop        
me instantly with his single shot, i might be able to hurl my blade like a         
spear. our eyes met.                                                               
he was beardless, slim. possibly light-eyed within the squint of his aim.          
he managed his mount well, with just the pressure of his legs. his hands           
were big, steady. capable. a peculiar feeling passed over me as i beheld           
him.                                                                               
the moment stretched beyond the point of action. he rocked backward                
and lowered the weapon slightly, though none of the tension left his stance.       
“you,” he called out. “is that the blade grayswandir?”                             
“yes,” i answered, “it is.”                                                        
he continued his appraisal, and something within me looked for words               
to wear, failed, ran naked away through the night.                                 
“what do you want here?” he asked.                                                 
“to depart,” i said.                                                               
there was a chish-chd, as his bolt struck the rock far ahead and to the            
left of me.                                                                        
“go then,” he said. “this is a dangerous place for you.”                           
he turned his mount back in the direction from which he had come.                  
i lowered grayswandir.                                                             
“i won’t forget you,” i said.                                                      
“no,” he answered. “do not.”                                                       
then he galloped away, and moments later the gauze drifted off also.               
i resheathed grayswandir and took a step forward. the world was                    
beginning to turn about me again, the light advancing on my right, the dark        
retreating to my left. i looked about for some way to scale the rocky              
prominence at my back. it seemed to rise only thirty or forty feet higher,         
and i wanted the view that might be available from its summit. my ledge            
extended to both my right and my left. on inspection, the way to the right         
narrowed quickly, however, without affording a suitable ascent. i turned and       
made my way to the left.                                                           
i came upon a rougher spot in a narrow place beyond a rocky shoulder.              
running my gaze up its height, an ascent seemed possible. i checked                
behind me after the approach of additional threats. the ghostly roadway            
had drifted farther away; no new riders advanced. i commenced climbing.            
the going was not difficult, though the height proved greater than it had          
seemed from below. likely a symptom of the spatial distortion which                
seemed to have affected my sight of so much else in this place. after a time,      
i hauled myself up and stood erect at a point which afforded a better view in      
the direction opposite the abyss.                                                  
once again, i beheld the chaotic colors. from my right, the darkness               
herded them. the land they danced above was rock-cropped and cratered,             
no sign of any life within it. passing through its midst, however, from the        
far horizon to a point in the mountains somewhere to the right, inky and           
serpentine, ran what could only be the black road.                                 
another ten minutes of climbing and maneuvering, and i had positioned              
myself to view its terminus. it swept through a broad pass in the mountains        
and ran right to the very edge of the abyss. there, its blackness merged with      
that which filled the place, noticeable now only by virtue of the fact that no     
stars shone through it. using this occlusion to gauge it, i obtained the           
impression that it continued on to the dark eminence about which the misty         
strips drifted.                                                                    
i stretched out on my belly, so as to disturb the outline of the low crest         
as little as possible to whatever unseen eyes might flick across it. lying         
there, i thought upon the opening of this way. the damage to the pattern           
had laid amber open to this access, and i believed that my curse had               
provided the precipitating element. i felt now that it would have come to          
pass without me, but i was certain that i had done my part. the guilt was          
still partly mine though no longer entirely so, as i had once believed. i          
thought then of eric, as he lay dying on kolvir. he had said that as much as       
he hated me, he was saving his dying curse for the enemies of amber. in            
other words, this, and these. ironic. my efforts were now entirely directed        
toward making good on my least-liked brother’s dying wish. his curse to            
cancel my curse, me as the agent. fitting though, perhaps, in some larger          
sense.                                                                             
i sought, and was pleased not to discover, ranks of glowing riders                 
setting forth or assembling upon that road. unless another raiding party was       
already under way amber was still temporarily safe. a number of things             
immediately troubled me, however. mainly, if time did indeed behave as             
peculiarly in that place as dara’s possible origin indicated, then why had         
there not been another attack? they had certainly had ample time in which          
to recover and prepare for another assault. had something occurred                 
recently, by amber’s time, that is, to alter the nature of their strategy? if so,  
what? my weapons? brand’s recovery? or something else? i wondered,                 
too, how far benedict’s outposts reached. certainly not this far, or i should      
have been informed. had he ever been to this place? had any of the others,         
within recent memory, stood where i had just stood, looking upon the               
courts of chaos, knowing something that i did not know? i resolved to              
question brand and benedict in this regard as soon as i returned.                  
all of which led me to wonder how time was behaving with me, at that               
moment. better not to spend any more time here than i had to, i decided. i         
scanned the other trumps i had removed from dworkin’s desk. while they             
were all of them interesting, i was familiar with none of the scenes               
depicted. i slipped my own case then and riffled through to random’s               
trump. perhaps he was the one who had tried to contact me earlier. i raised        
his card and regarded it.                                                          
shortly, it swam before my eyes and i looked upon a blurred                        
kaleidoscope of images, the impression of random in their midst. motion,           
and twisting perspectives…                                                         
“random,” i said. “this is corwin.”                                                
i felt his mind, but there was no response from it. it struck me then that         
he was in the middle of a hellride, all his concentration bent on wrapping         
the stuff of shadow about him. he could not respond without losing control.        
i blocked the trump with my hand, breaking the contact.                            
i cut to gerard’s card. moments later, there was contact. i stood.                 
“corwin, where are you?” he inquired.                                              
“at the end of the world,” i said. “i want to come home.”                          
“come ahead.”                                                                      
he extended his hand. i reached out and clasped it, stepped forward.               
we were on the ground floor of the palace in amber, in the sitting room            
to which we had all adjourned on the night of brand’s return. it seemed to         
be early morning. there was a fire going on the grate. no one else was             
present.                                                                           
“i tried to reach you earlier,” he said. “i think brand did, too. but i can’t      
be sure.”                                                                          
“how long have i been away?”                                                       
“eight days,” he said.                                                             
“glad i hurried. what’s happening?”                                                
“nothing untoward,” he said. “i do not know what brand wants. he                   
kept asking for you, and i could not reach you. finally, i gave him a deck         
and told him to see whether he could do any better. apparently, he could           
not.”                                                                              
“i was distracted,” i said, “and the time-flow differential was bad.”              
he nodded.                                                                         
“i have been avoiding him now that he is out of danger. he is in one of            
his black moods again, and he insists he can take care of himself. he is           
right, in that, and it is just as well.”                                           
“where is he now?”                                                                 
“back in his own quarters, and he was still there as of perhaps an hour            
ago—brooding.”                                                                     
“has he been out at all?”                                                          
“a few brief walks. but not for the past several days.”                            
“i guess i had best go see him then. any word on random?”                          
“yes,” he said. “benedict returned several days ago. he said they had              
found a number of leads concerning random’s son. he helped him check               
on a couple of them. one led further, but benedict felt he had best not be         
away from amber for too long, things being as uncertain as they are. so he         
left random to continue the search on his own. he gained something in the          
venture, though. he came back sporting an artificial arm—a beautiful piece         
of work. he can do anything with it that he could before.”                         
“really?” i said. “it sounds strangely familiar.”                                  
he smiled, nodded.                                                                 
“he told me you had brought it back for him from tir-na nog’th. in                 
fact, he wants to speak with you about it as soon as possible.”                    
“i’ll bet,” i said. “where is he now?”                                             
“at one of the outposts he has established along the black road. you               
would have to reach him by trump.”                                                 
“thanks,” i said. “anything further on julian or fiona?”                           
he shook his head.                                                                 
“all right,” i said, turning toward the door. “i guess i will go see brand         
first.”                                                                            
“i am curious to know what it is that he wants,” he said.                          
“i will remember that,” i told him. i left the room and headed for the             
stairs.                                                                            
                                                                      
chapter 7                                                                          
i rapped on brand’s door.                                                          
“come in, corwin,” he said.                                                        
i did, deciding as i crossed the threshold that i would not ask him how            
he had known who it was. his room was a gloomy place, candles burning              
despite the fact that it was daytime and he had four windows. the shutters         
were closed on three of them. the fourth was only part way open. brand             
stood beside this one, staring out toward the sea. he was dressed all in           
black velvet with a silver chain about his neck. his belt was also of silver—      
a fine, linked affair. he played with a small dagger, and did not look at me       
as i entered. he was still pale, but his beard was neatly trimmed and he           
looked well scrubbed and a bit heavier than he had when last i had seen            
him.                                                                               
“you are looking better,” i said. “how are you feeling?”                           
he turned and regarded me, expressionless, his eyes half-closed.                   
“where the hell have you been?” he said.                                           
“hither and yon. what did you want to see me about?”                               
“i asked you where you’ve been.”                                                   
“and i heard you,” i said, reopening the door behind me. “now i am                 
going to go out and come back in. supposing we start this conversation             
over again?”                                                                       
he sighed.                                                                         
“wait a minute. i am sorry,” he said. “why are we all so thin-skinned? i           
do not know… all right. it may be better if i do start over again.”                
he sheathed his dagger and crossed to sit in a heavy chair of black                
wood and leather.                                                                  
“i got to worrying about all the things we had discussed,” he said, “and           
some that we had not. i waited what seemed an appropriate time for you to          
have concluded your business in tir-na nog’th and returned. i then inquired        
after you and was told you had not yet come back. i waited longer. first i         
was impatient, and then i grew concerned that you might have been                  
ambushed by our enemies. when i inquired again later, i learned that you           
had been back only long enough to speak with random’s wife—it must                 
have been a conversation of great moment—and then to take a nap. you               
then departed once more. i was irritated that you had not seen fit to keep me      
posted as to events, but i resolved to wait a bit longer. finally, i asked         
gerard to get hold of you with your trump. when he failed, i was quite             
concerned. i tried it myself then, and while it seemed that i touched you on       
several occasions i could not get through. i feared for you, and now i see         
that i had nothing to fear all along. hence, i was abrupt.”                        
“i see,” i said, taking a seat off to his right. “actually, time was running       
faster for me than it was for you, so from where i am sitting i have hardly        
been away. you are probably further recuperated from your puncture than i          
am from mine.”                                                                     
he smiled faintly and nodded.                                                      
“that is something, anyway,” he said, “for my pains.”                              
“i have had a few pains myself,” i said, “so don’t give me any more.               
you wanted me for something. let’s have it.”                                       
“something is bothering you,” he said. “perhaps we ought to discuss                
that first.”                                                                       
“all right,” i said. “let’s.”                                                      
i turned and looked at the painting on the wall beside the door. an oil, a         
rather somber rendering of the well at mirata, two men standing beside their       
horses nearby, talking.                                                            
“you’ve a distinctive style,” i said.                                              
“in all things,” he replied.                                                       
“you stole my next sentence,” i said, locating martin’s trump and                  
passing it to him.                                                                 
he remained expressionless as he examined it, gave me one brief,                   
sidelong look and then nodded.                                                     
“i cannot deny my hand,” he said.                                                  
“it executed more than that card, your hand. didn’t it?”                           
he traced his upper lip with the tip of his tongue.                                
“where did you find it?” he asked.                                                 
“right where you left it, at the heart of things—in the real amber.”               
“so…” he said, rising from the chair and returning to the window,                  
holding up the card as if to study it in a better light. “so,” he repeated, “you   
are aware of more than i had guessed. how did you learn of the primal              
pattern?”                                                                          
i shook my head.                                                                   
“you answer my question first: did you stab martin?”                               
he turned toward me once again, stared a moment, then nodded sharply.              
his eyes continued to search my face                                               
“why?” i asked.                                                                    
“someone had to,” he explained, “to open the way for the powers we                 
needed. we drew straws.”                                                           
“and you won.”                                                                     
“won? lost?” he shrugged. “what does any of this matter now? things                
did not come about as we had intended. i am a different person now than i          
was then.”                                                                         
“did you kill him?”                                                                
“what?”                                                                            
“martin, random’s son. did he die as a result of the wound you                     
inflicted?”                                                                        
he turned his hands palms upward.                                                  
“i do not know,” he said. “if he did not, it was not because i did not try.        
you need look no further. you have found your guilty party. now that you           
have, what are you going to do?”                                                   
i shook my head.                                                                   
“i? nothing. for all i know, the lad may still be living.”                         
“then let us move on to matters of greater moment. for how long have               
you known of the existence of the true pattern?”                                   
“long enough,” i said. “its origin, its functions, the effect of the blood         
of amber upon it—long enough. i paid more attention to dworkin than you            
might have thought. i saw no gain to be had in damaging the fabric of              
existence, though. so i let rover lie sleeping for a long, long while. it did      
not even occur to me until i spoke with you recently that the black road           
might have been connected with such foolishness. when i went to inspect            
the pattern i found martin’s trump and all the rest.”                              
“i was not aware that you were acquainted with martin.”                            
“i have never set eyes on him.”                                                    
“then how were you aware he was the subject of the trump?”                         
“i was not alone in that place.”                                                   
“who was with you?”                                                                
i smiled.                                                                          
“no, brand. it is still your turn. you told me when last we talked that            
the enemies of amber hied all the way from the courts of chaos, that they          
have access to the realm via the black road because of something you and           
bleys and fiona had done back when you were of one mind as to the best             
way to take the throne. now i know what it is that you did. yet benedict           
has been watching the black road and i have just looked upon the courts of         
chaos. there is no new massing of forces, no movement toward us upon               
that road. i know that time flows differently in that place. they should have      
had more than enough time to ready a new assault. i want to know what is           
holding them back. why have they not moved? what are they waiting for,             
brand?”                                                                            
“you credit me with more knowledge than i possess.”                                
“i don’t think so. you are the resident expert on the subject. you have            
dealt with them. that trump is evidence that you have been holding back            
on other matters. don’t weasel, just talk.”                                        
“the courts…” he said. “you have been busy. eric was a fool not to                 
have killed you immediately—if he was aware you had knowledge of these             
things.”                                                                           
“eric was a fool,” i acknowledged. “you are not. now talk.”                        
“but i am a fool,” he said, “a sentimental one, at that. do you recall the         
day of our last argument, here in amber, so long ago?”                             
“somewhat.”                                                                        
“i was sitting on the edge of my bed. you were standing by my writing              
desk. as you turned away and headed toward the door, i resolved to kill            
you. i reached beneath my bed, where i keep a cocked crossbow with a bolt          
in it. i actually had my hand on it and was about to raise it when i realized      
something which stopped me.”                                                       
he paused.                                                                         
“what was that?” i asked.                                                          
“look over there by the door.”                                                     
i looked, i saw nothing special. i began to shake my head, just as he              
said, “on the floor.”                                                              
then i realized what it was—russet and olive and brown and green,                  
with a small geometric pattern. he nodded.                                         
“you were standing on my favorite rug. i did not want to get blood on it.          
later, my anger passed. so i, too, am a victim of emotion and                      
circumstance.”                                                                     
“lovely story—” i began.                                                           
“—but now you want me to stop stalling. i was not stalling, however. i             
was attempting to make a point. we are all of us alive by one another’s            
sufferance and an occasional fortunate accident. i am going to propose             
suspending that sufferance and eliminating the possibility of accident in a        
couple of very important cases. first though, to answer your question, while       
i do not know for certain what is holding them back, i can venture a very          
good guess. bleys has assembled a large strike force for an attack on              
amber. it will be nowhere near the scale of the one on which you                   
accompanied him, however. you see, he will be counting on the memory of            
that last attack to have conditioned the response to this one. it will probably    
also be preceded by attempts to assassinate benedict and yourself. the             
entire affair will be a feint, though. i would guess that fiona has contacted      
the courts of chaos—may even be there right now—and has prepared them              
for the real attack, which might be expected any time after bleys’s                
diversionary foray. therefore—”                                                    
“you say this is a very good guess,” i interrupted. “but we do not even            
know for certain that bleys is still living.”                                      
“bleys is alive,” he said. “i was able to ascertain his existence via his          
trump—even a brief assessment of his current activities—before he                  
became aware of my presence and blocked me out. he is very sensitive to            
such surveillance. i found him in the field with troops he intends to employ       
against amber.”                                                                    
“and fiona?”                                                                       
“no,” he said, “i did no experimenting with her trump, and i would                 
advise you not to either. she is extremely dangerous, and i did not want to        
lay my self open to her influence. my estimate of her current situation is         
based on deduction rather than direct knowledge. i would be willing to rely        
on it, though.”                                                                    
“i see,” i said.                                                                   
“i have a plan.”                                                                   
“go ahead.”                                                                        
“the manner in which you retrieved me from durance was quite                       
inspired, combining the forces of everyone’s concentration as you did. the         
same principle could be utilized again, to a different end. a force such as        
that would break through a person’s defense fairly easily—even someone             
like fiona, if the effort is properly directed.”                                   
“that is to say, directed by yourself?”                                            
“of course. i propose that we assemble the family and force our way                
through to bleys and fiona, wherever they may be. we hold them, locked in          
the full, in the flesh, just for a moment or so. just long enough for me to        
strike.”                                                                           
“as you did martin?”                                                               
“better, i trust. martin was able to break free at the last moment. that           
should not occur this time, with all of you helping. even three or four            
would probably be sufficient.”                                                     
“you really think you can pull it off that easily?”                                
“i know we had better try. time is running. you will be one of the ones            
executed when they take amber. so will i. what do you say?”                        
“if i become convinced that it is necessary. then i would have no                  
choice but to go along with it.”                                                   
“it is necessary, believe me. the next thing is that i will need the jewel         
of judgment.”                                                                      
“what for?”                                                                        
“if fiona is truly in the courts of chaos, the trump alone will probably           
be insufficient to reach her and hold her—even with all of us behind it. in        
her case, i will require the jewel to focus our energies.”                         
“i suppose that could be arranged.”                                                
“then the sooner we are about it the better. can you set things up for             
tonight? i am sufficiently recovered to handle my end of it.”                      
“hell, no,” i said, standing.                                                      
“what do you mean?” he clenched the arms of the chair, half-rising.                
“why not?”                                                                         
“i said i would go along with it if i became convinced that it was                 
necessary. you have admitted that a lot of this is conjecture. that alone is       
sufficient to keep me from being convinced.”                                       
“forget about being convinced then. can you afford to take the chance?             
the next attack is going to be a lot stronger than the last, corwin. they are      
aware of your new weapons. they are going to allow for this in their               
planning.”                                                                         
“even if i agreed with you brand, i am certain i could not convince the            
others that the executions are necessary.”                                         
“convince them? just tell them! you’ve got them all by the throat,                 
corwin! you are on top right now. you want to stay there, don’t you?”              
i smiled and moved toward the door.                                                
“i will, too,” i said, “by doing things my way. i will keep your                   
suggestion on file.”                                                               
“your way is going to get you dead. sooner than you think.”                        
“i am standing on your rug again,” i said.                                         
he laughed.                                                                        
“very good. but i was not threatening you. you know what i meant.                  
you are responsible for all of amber now. you have to do the right thing.”         
“and you know what i meant. i am not going to kill a couple more of us             
because of your suspicions. i would need more than that.”                          
“when you get it, it may be too late.”                                             
i shrugged.                                                                        
“we’ll see.” i reached toward the door.                                            
“what are you going to do now?”                                                    
i shook my head.                                                                   
“i don’t tell anybody everything that i know, brand. it is a kind of               
insurance.”                                                                        
“i can appreciate that. i only hope that you know enough.”                         
“or perhaps you fear that i know too much,” i said.                                
for a moment a wary look danced on the muscles beneath his eyes.                   
then he smiled. “i am not afraid of you, brother,” he said.                        
“it is good to have nothing to fear,” i said. i opened the door.                   
“wait,” he said.                                                                   
“yes?”                                                                             
“you neglected to tell me who was with you when you discovered                     
martin’s trump, in the place where i had left it.”                                 
“why, it was random,” i said.                                                      
“oh. is he aware of the particulars?”                                              
“if you mean, does he know that you stabbed his son,” i said, “the                 
answer is no, not yet.”                                                            
“i see. and of benedict’s new arm? i understand that you somehow got               
it for him in tir-na nog’th. i would like to know more about this.”                
“not now,” i said. “let’s save something for our next get-together. it             
won’t be all that long.”                                                           
i went on out and closed the door, my silent regards to the rug.                   
                                                                      
chapter 8                                                                          
after visiting the kitchens, compiling an enormous meal and demolishing            
it, i headed for the stables, where i located a handsome young sorrel which        
had once belonged to eric. i made friends with him in spite of this, and a         
short while later we were moving toward the trail down kolvir which                
would take us to the camp of my shadow forces. as i rode and digested, i           
tried to sort out the events and revelations of what, to me, had been the past     
few hours. if amber had indeed arisen as the result of dworkin’s act of            
rebellion within the courts of chaos, then it followed that we were all of us      
related to the very forces which now threatened us. it was, of course,             
difficult to decide how far anything dworkin said might now be trusted.            
yet, the black road did run to the courts of chaos, apparently as a direct         
result of brand’s ritual, a thing which he had based on principles learned         
from dworkin. fortunately, for now, the parts of dworkin’s narrative which         
required the greatest credulity were those things which were not of any            
great moment, from an immediate, practical standpoint. still, i had mixed          
feelings about being descended from a unicorn—                                     
“corwin!”                                                                          
i drew rein. i opened my mind to the sending and the image of ganelon              
appeared.                                                                          
“i am here,” i said. “where did you get hold of a set of trumps? and               
learn how to use them?”                                                            
“i picked up a pack from the case in the library a while back. thought it          
a good idea to have a way of getting in touch with you in a hurry. as for          
using them, i just did what you and the others seem to do—study the                
trump, think about it, concentrate on getting in touch with the person.”           
“i should have gotten you a pack long ago,” i said. “it was an oversight           
on my part which i am glad you’ve remedied. are you just testing them              
now, or did something come up?”                                                    
“something,” he said. “where are you?”                                             
“as chance would have it, i am on my way down to see you.”                         
“you are all right?”                                                               
“yes.”                                                                             
“fine. come ahead then. i’d rather not try bringing you through this               
thing, the way you people do. it is not that urgent. i will see you by and by.”    
“yes.”                                                                             
he broke the contact and i rustled the reins and continued on. for a               
moment, i had been irritated that he had not simply asked me for a deck.           
then i recalled that i had been away for over a week, by amber’s time. he          
had probably been getting worried, didn’t trust any of the others to do it for     
him. perhaps rightly so.                                                           
the descent went quickly, as did the balance of the journey to the camp.           
the horse—whose name, by the way, was drum—seemed happy to be                      
going somewhere and had a tendency to pull away at the least excuse. i             
gave him his head at one point to tire him a bit, and it was not too long          
afterward that i sighted the camp. i realized at about that time that i missed     
star.                                                                              
i was the subject of stares and salutes as i rode into camp. a silence             
followed me and all activity ceased as i passed. i wondered whether they           
believed i had come to deliver a battle order.                                     
ganelon emerged from his tent before i had dismounted.                             
“fast,” he observed, clasping my hand as i came down. “pretty horse,               
that.”                                                                             
“yes,” i agreed, turning the reins over to his orderly. “what news have            
you?”                                                                              
“well…” he said. “i’ve been talking to benedict…”                                  
“something stirring on the black road?”                                            
“no, no. nothing like that. he came to see me after he returned from               
those friends of his—the tecys—to tell me that random was all right, that          
he was following a lead as to martin’s whereabouts. we got to talking of           
other matters after that, and finally he asked me to tell him everything i         
knew about dara. random had told him about her walking the pattern, and            
he had decided then that too many people other than yourself were aware of         
her existence.”                                                                    
“so what did you tell him?”                                                        
“everything.”                                                                      
“including the guesswork, the speculation after tirna nog’th?”                     
“just so.”                                                                         
“i see. how did he take this?”                                                     
“he seemed excited about it. happy, i’d even say. come talk with him               
yourself.”                                                                         
i nodded and he turned toward his tent. he pushed back the flap and                
stepped aside. i entered.                                                          
benedict was seated on a low stool beside a foot locker atop which a               
map had been spread. he was tracing something on the map with the long             
metal finger of the glinting, skeletal hand attached to the deadly, silver-        
cabled, firepinned mechanical arm i had brought back from the city in the          
sky, the entire device now attached to the stump of his right arm a little         
below the point where the sleeve had been cut away from his brown shirt, a         
transformation which halted me with a momentary shudder, so much did he            
resemble the ghost i had encountered. his eyes rose to meet my own and he          
raised the hand in greeting, a casual, perfectly executed gesture, and he          
smiled the broadest smile i had ever seen crease his face.                         
“corwin!” he said, and then he rose and extended that hand.                        
i had to force myself to clasp the device which had almost killed me.              
but benedict looked more kindly disposed toward me than he had in a long           
while. i shook the new hand and its pressures were perfect. i tried to             
disregard its coldness and angularity and almost succeeded, in my                  
amazement at the control he had acquired over it in such a brief time.             
“i owe you an apology,” he said. “i have wronged you. i am very sorry.”            
“it’s all right,” i said. “i understand.”                                          
he clasped me for a moment, and my belief that things had apparently               
been set right between us was darkened only by the grip of those precise           
and deadly fingers on my shoulder.                                                 
ganelon chuckled and brought up another stool, which he set at the                 
other end of the locker. my irritation at his having aired the subject i had       
not wanted mentioned, whatever the circumstances, was submerged by the             
sight of its effects. i could not remember having seen benedict in better          
spirits; ganelon was obviously pleased at having effected the resolution of        
our differences.                                                                   
i smiled myself and accepted a seat, unbuckling my sword belt and                  
hanging grayswandir on the tent pole. ganelon produced three glasses and           
a bottle of wine. as he set the glasses before us and poured, he remarked,         
“to return the hospitality of your tent, that night, back in avalon.”              
benedict took up his glass with but the faintest of clicks.                        
“there is more ease in this tent,” he said. “is that not so, corwin?”              
i nodded and raised my glass.                                                      
“to that ease. may it always prevail.”                                             
“i have had my first opportunity in a long while,” he said, “to talk with          
random at some length. he has changed quite a bit.”                                
“yes,” i agreed.                                                                   
“i am more inclined to trust him now than i was in days gone by. we                
had the time to talk after we left the tecys.”                                     
“where were you headed?”                                                           
“some comments martin had made to his host seemed to indicate that                 
he was going to a place i knew of further off in shadow—the block city of          
heerat. we journeyed there and found this to be correct. he had passed that        
way.”                                                                              
“i am not familiar with heerat,” i said.                                           
“a place of adobe and stone—a commercial center at the junction of                 
several trade routes. there, random found news which took him eastward             
and probably deeper into shadow. we parted company at heerat, for i did            
not want to be away from amber overlong. also, there was a personal                
matter i was anxious to pursue. he told me how he had seen dara walk the           
pattern on the day of the battle.”                                                 
“that’s right,” i said. “she did. i was there, too.”                               
he nodded.                                                                         
“as i said. random had impressed me. i was inclined to believe he was              
telling the truth. if this were so, then it was possible that you were also.       
granting this, i had to pursue the matter of the girl’s allegations. you were      
not available, so i came to ganelon—this was several days ago—and had              
him tell me everything he knew about dara.”                                        
i glanced at ganelon, who inclined his head slightly.                              
“so you now believe you have uncovered a new relative,” i said, “a                 
mendacious one, to be sure, and quite possibly an enemy—but a relative,            
nevertheless. what is your next move?”                                             
he took a sip of wine.                                                             
“i would like to believe in the relationship,” he said. “the notion                
somehow pleases me. so i would like to establish it or negate it to a              
certainty. if it turns out that we are indeed related, then i would like to        
understand the motives behind her actions. and i would like to learn why           
she never made her existence known to me directly.”                                
he put down his glass, raised his new hand and flexed the fingers.                 
“so i would like to begin,” he continued, “by learning of those things             
you experienced in tir-na nog’th which apply to me and to dara. i am also          
extremely curious about this hand, which behaves as if it were made for me.        
i have never heard of a physical object being obtained in the city in the          
sky.”                                                                              
he made a fist, unclenched it, rotated the wrist, extended the arm, raised         
it, lowered it gently to his knee.                                                 
“random performed a very effective piece of surgery, don’t you think?”             
he concluded.                                                                      
“very,” i agreed.                                                                  
“so, will you tell me the story?”                                                  
i nodded and took a sip of my wine.                                                
“it was in the palace in the sky that it occurred,” i said. “the place was         
filled with inky, shifting shadows. i felt impelled to visit the throne room. i    
did this, and when the shadows moved aside, i saw you standing to the right        
of the throne, wearing that arm. when things cleared further, i saw dara           
seated upon the throne. i advanced and touched her with grayswandir,               
which made me visible to her. she declared me dead these several centuries         
and bade me return to my grave. when i demanded her lineage, she said she          
was descended of you and of the hellmaid lintra.”                                  
benedict drew a deep breath but said nothing. i continued:                         
“time, she said, moved at such a different rate in the place of her birth,         
that several generations had passed there. she was the first of them               
possessed of regular human attributes. she again bade me depart. during            
this time, you had been studying grayswandir. you struck then to remove            
her from danger, and we fought. my blade could reach you and your hand             
could reach me. that was all. otherwise, it was a confrontation of ghosts.         
as the sun began to rise and the city to fade, you had me in a grip with that      
hand. i struck it free of the arm with grayswandir and escaped. it was             
returned with me because it was still clasping my shoulder.”                       
“curious,” benedict said. “i have known that place to render false                 
prophecies—the fears and hidden desires of the visitor, rather than a true         
picture of what is to be. but then, it often reveals unknown truths as well.       
and as in most other things, it is difficult to separate the valid from the        
spurious. how did you read it?”                                                    
“benedict,” i said, “i am inclined to believe the story of her origin. you         
have never seen her, but i have. she does resemble you in some ways. as            
for the rest… it is doubtless as you said—that which is left after the truth       
has been separated out.”                                                           
he nodded slowly, and i could tell that he was not convinced but did not           
want to push the matter. he knew as well as i did what the rest implied. if        
he were to pursue his claim to the throne and succeed in achieving it, it was      
possible that he might one day step aside in favor of his only descendant.         
“what are you going to do?” i asked him.                                           
“do?” he said. “what is random now doing about martin? i shall seek                
her, find her, have the story from her own lips, and then decide for myself.       
this will have to wait, however, until the matter of the black road is settled.    
that is another matter i wish to discuss with you.”                                
“yes?”                                                                             
“if time moves so differently in their stronghold, they have had more              
than they need in which to mount another attack. i do not want to keep             
waiting to meet them in indecisive encounters. i am contemplating                  
following the black road back to its source and attacking them on their            
home ground. i would like to do it with your concurrence.”                         
“benedict,” i said, “have you ever looked upon the courts of chaos?”               
he raised his head and stared at the blank wall of the tent.                       
“ages ago, when i was young,” he said, “i hellrode as far as i might go,           
to the end of everything. there, beneath a divided sky, i looked upon an           
awesome abyss. i do not know if the place lies there or if the road runs that      
far, but i am prepared to take that way again, if such is the case.”               
“such is the case,” i said.                                                        
“how can you be certain?”                                                          
“i am just returned from that land. a dark citadel hovers within it. the           
road goes to it.”                                                                  
“how difficult was the way?”                                                       
“here,” i said, taking out the trump and passing it to him.                        
“this was dworkin’s. i found it among his things. i only just tried it. it         
took me there. time is already rapid at that point. i was attacked by a rider      
on a drifting roadway, of a sort not shown on the card. trump contact is           
difficult there, perhaps because of the time differential. gerard brought me       
back.”                                                                             
he studied the card.                                                               
“it seems the place i saw that time,” he said at length. “this solves our          
logistics problems. with one of us on either end of a trump connection we          
can transport the troops right through, as we did that day from kolvir to          
gamath.”                                                                           
i nodded.                                                                          
“that is one of the reasons i showed it to you, to indicate my good faith.         
there may be another way, involving less risk than running our forces into         
the unknown. i want you to hold off on this venture until i have explored          
my way further.”                                                                   
“i will have to hold off in any event, to obtain some intelligence                 
concerning that place. we do not even know whether your automatic                  
weapons will function there, do we?”                                               
“no, i did not have one along to test.”                                            
he pursed his lips.                                                                
“you really should have thought to take one and try it.”                           
“the circumstances of my departure did not permit this.”                           
“circumstances?”                                                                   
“another time. it is not relevant here. you spoke of following the black           
road to its source…”                                                               
“yes?”                                                                             
“that is not its true source. its real source lies in the true amber, in the       
defect in the primal pattern.”                                                     
“yes, i understand that. both random and ganelon have described your               
journey to the place of the true pattern, and the damage you discovered            
there. i see the analogy, the possible connection—”                                
“do you recall my flight from avalon, and your pursuit?”                           
in answer, he only smiled faintly.                                                 
“there was a point where we crossed the black road,” i said. “do you               
recall it?”                                                                        
he narrowed his eyes.                                                              
“yes,” he said. “you cut a path through it. the world had returned to              
normal at that point. i had forgotten.”                                            
“it was an effect of the pattern upon it,” i said, “one which i believe can        
be employed upon a much larger scale.”                                             
“how much larger?”                                                                 
“to wipe out the entire thing.”                                                    
he leaned back and studied my face.                                                
“then why are you not about it?”                                                   
“there are a few preliminaries i must undertake.”                                  
“how much time will they involve?”                                                 
“not too much. possibly as little as a few days. perhaps a few weeks.”             
“why didn’t you mention all of this sooner?”                                       
“i only learned how to go about it recently.”                                      
“how do you go about it?”                                                          
“basically, it amounts to repairing the pattern.”                                  
“all right,” he said. “say you succeed. the enemy will still be out                
there.”                                                                            
he gestured toward garnath and the black road.                                     
“someone gave them passage once.”                                                  
“the enemy has always been out there,” i said. “and it will be up to us            
to see that they are not given passage again—by dealing properly with those        
who provided it in the first place.”                                               
“i go along with you on that,” he said, “but that is not what i meant.             
they require a lesson, corwin. i want to teach them a proper respect for           
amber, such a respect that even if the way is opened again they will fear to       
use it. that is what i meant. it is necessary.”                                    
“you do not know what it would be like to carry a battle to that place,            
benedict. it is—literally—indescribable.”                                          
he smiled and stood.                                                               
“then i guess i had best go see for myself,” he said. “i will keep this            
card for a time, if you don’t mind.”                                               
“i don’t mind.”                                                                    
“good. then you be on with your business about the pattern, corwin,                
and i will be about my own. this will take me some time, too. i must go            
give my commanders orders concerning my absence now. let us agree that             
neither of us commence anything of a final nature without checking first           
with the other.”                                                                   
“agreed,” i said.                                                                  
we finished our wine.                                                              
“i will be under way myself, very soon now,” i said. “so, good luck.”              
“to you, also.” he smiled again. “things are better,” he said, and he              
clasped my shoulder as he passed to the entrance. we followed him outside.         
“bring benedict’s horse,” ganelon directed the orderly who stood                   
beneath a nearby tree; and turning, he offered benedict his hand.                  
“i, too, want to wish you luck,” he said.                                          
benedict nodded and shook his hand.                                                
“thank you, ganelon. for many things.”                                             
benedict withdrew his trumps.                                                      
“i can bring gerard up to date,” he said, “before my horse arrives.”               
he riffled through them, withdrew one, studied it.                                 
“how do you go about repairing the pattern?” ganelon asked me.                     
“i have to get hold of the jewel of judgment again,” i said. “with it, i           
can reinscribe the damaged area.”                                                  
“is this dangerous?”                                                               
“yes.”                                                                             
“where is the jewel?”                                                              
“back on the shadow earth, where i left it.”                                       
“why did you abandon it?”                                                          
“i feared that it was killing me.”                                                 
he contorted his features into a near-impossible grimace.                          
“i don’t like the sound of this, corwin. there must be another way.”               
“if i knew a better way, i’d take it.”                                             
“supposing you just followed benedict’s plan and took them all on?                 
you said yourself that he could raise infinite legions in shadow. you also         
said that he is the best man there is in the field.”                               
“yet the damage would remain in the pattern, and something else would              
come to fill it. always. the enemy of the moment is not as important as our        
own inner weakness. if this is not mended we are already defeated, though          
no foreign conqueror stands within our walls.”                                     
he turned away.                                                                    
“i cannot argue with you. you know your own realm,” he said. “but i                
still feel you may be making a grave mistake by risking yourself on what           
may prove unnecessary at a time when you are very much needed.”                    
i chuckled, for it was vialle’s word and i had not wanted to call it my            
own when she had said it.                                                          
“it is my duty,” i told him.                                                       
he did not reply.                                                                  
benedict, a dozen paces away, had apparently reached gerard, for he                
would mutter something, then pause and listen. we stood there, waiting for         
him to conclude his conversation so that we could see him off.                     
“…yes, he is here now,” i heard him say. “no, i doubt that very much.              
but—”                                                                              
benedict glanced at me several times and shook his head.                           
“no, i do not think so,” he said. then, “all right, come ahead.”                   
he extended his new hand, and gerard stepped into being, clasping it.              
gerard turned his head, saw me, and immediately moved in my direction.             
he ran his eyes up and down and back and forth across my entire                    
person, as if searching for something.                                             
“what is the matter?” i said.                                                      
“brand,” he replied. “he is no longer in his quarters. at least, most of           
him isn’t. he left some blood behind. the place is also broken up enough to        
show there had been a fight.”                                                      
i glanced down at my shirt front and trousers.                                     
“and you are looking for bloodstains? as you can see, these are the                
same things i had on earlier. they may be dirty and wrinkled, but that’s all.”     
“that does not really prove anything,” he said.                                    
“it was your idea to look. not mine. what makes you think i—”                      
“you were the last one to see him,” he said.                                       
“except for the person be had a fight with—if he really did.”                      
“what do you mean by that?”                                                        
“you know his temper, his moods. we had a small argument. he might                 
have started breaking things up after i left, maybe cut himself, gotten            
disgusted, trumped out for a change of scene—wait! his rug! was there any          
blood on that small, fancy rug before his door?”                                   
“i am not sure—no, i don’t think so. why?”                                         
“circumstantial evidence that he did it himself. he was very fond of               
that rug. he avoided messing it.”                                                  
“i don’t buy it,” gerard said, “and caine’s death still looks peculiar—            
and benedict’s servants, who could have found out you wanted gunpowder.            
now brand—”                                                                        
“this could well be another attempt to frame me,” i said, “and benedict            
and i have come to better terms.”                                                  
he turned toward benedict, who had not moved from where he stood a                 
dozen paces away, regarding us without expression, listening.                      
“has he explained away those deaths?” gerard asked him.                            
“not directly,” benedict answered, “but much of the rest of the story              
now stands in a better light. so much so, that i am inclined to believe all of     
it.”                                                                               
gerard shook his head and glared down at me again.                                 
“still unsettled,” he said. “what were you and brand arguing about?”               
“gerard,” i said, “that is our business, till brand and i decide                   
otherwise.”                                                                        
“i dragged him back to life and watched over him, corwin. i didn’t do it           
just to see him killed in a squabble.”                                             
“use your brains,” i told him. “whose idea was it to search for him the            
way that we did? to bring him back?”                                               
“you wanted something from him,” he said. “you finally got it. then he             
became an impediment.”                                                             
“no. but even if that were the case, do you think i would be so damned             
obvious about it? if he has been killed, then it is on the same order as           
caine’s death—an attempt to frame me.”                                             
“you used the obviousness excuse with caine, too. it seems to me it                
could be a kind of subtlety—a thing you are good at.”                              
“we have been through this before, gerard…”                                        
“…and you know what i told you then.”                                              
“it would be difficult to have forgotten.”                                         
he reached forward and seized my right shoulder. i immediately drove               
my left hand into his stomach and pulled away. it occurred to me then that         
perhaps i should have told him what brand and i had been talking about.            
but i didn’t like the way he had asked me.                                         
he came at me again. i side-stepped and caught him with a light left               
near the right eye. i kept jabbing after that, mainly to keep his head back. i     
was in no real shape to fight him again, and grayswandir was back in the           
tent. i had no other weapon with me.                                               
i kept circling him. my side hurt if i kicked with my left leg. i caught           
him once on the thigh with my right, but i was slow and off-balance and            
could not really follow through. i continued to jab.                               
finally, he blocked my left and managed to drop his hand on my biceps.             
i should have pulled away then, but he was open. i stepped in with a heavy         
right to his stomach, all of my strength behind it. it bent him forward with a     
gasp, but his grip tightened on my arm. he blocked my attempted uppercut           
with his left, continuing its forward motion until the heel of his hand            
slammed against my chest, at the same time jerking my left arm backward            
and to the side with such force that i was thrown to the ground. if he came        
down on me, that was it.                                                           
he dropped to one knee and reached for my throat.                                  
                                                                      
chapter 9                                                                          
i moved to block his hand, but it halted in midreach. turning my head, i           
saw that another hand had fallen upon gerard’s arm, was now grasping it,           
was holding it back.                                                               
i rolled away. when i looked up again, i saw that ganelon had caught               
hold of him. gerard jerked his arm forward, but it did not come free.              
“stay out of this, ganelon,” he said.                                              
“get going, corwin!” ganelon said. “get the jewel!”                                
even as he called out, gerard was beginning to rise. ganelon crossed               
with his left and connected with gerard’s jaw. gerard sprawled at his feet.        
ganelon moved in and swung a kick toward his kidney, but gerard caught             
his foot and heaved him over backward. i scrambled back into a crouch,             
supporting myself with one hand.                                                   
gerard came up off the ground and rushed ganelon, who was just                     
recovering his feet. as he was almost upon him, ganelon came up with a             
double-fisted blow to guard’s midsection, which halted him in his tracks.          
instantly, ganelon’s fists were moving like pistons against gerard’s               
abdomen. for several moments, gerard seemed too dazed to protect                   
himself, and when he finally bent and brought his arms in, ganelon caught          
him with a right to the jaw that staggered him backward. ganelon                   
immediately rushed forward, throwing his arms about gerard as he                   
slammed into him and hooking his right leg behind gerard’s own. gerard             
toppled and ganelon fell upon him. he straddled gerard then and drove his          
right fist against his jaw. when gerard’s head rolled back, ganelon crossed        
with his left.                                                                     
benedict suddenly moved to intervene, but ganelon chose that moment                
to rise to his feet. gerard lay unconscious, bleeding from his mouth and           
nose. i got shakily to my own feet, dusted myself off. ganelon grinned at          
me.                                                                                
“don’t stay around,” he said. “i don’t know how i would do in a                    
rematch. go find the trinket.”                                                     
i glanced at benedict and he nodded. i returned to the tent for                    
grayswandir.                                                                       
when i emerged, gerard still had not moved, but benedict stood before              
me.                                                                                
“remember,” he said, “you’ve my trump and i’ve yours. nothing final                
without a conference.”                                                             
i nodded. i was going to ask him why he had seemed willing to help                 
gerard, but not me. but second thoughts had me and i decided against               
spoiling our fresh-minted amity.                                                   
“okay.”                                                                            
i headed toward the horses. ganelon clapped me on the shoulder as i                
came up to him.                                                                    
“good luck,” he said. “i’d go with you, but i am needed here—                      
especially with benedict trumping off to chaos.”                                   
“good show,” i said. “i shouldn’t have any trouble. don’t worry.”                  
i went off to the paddock. shortly, i was mounted and moving. ganelon              
threw me a salute as i passed and i returned it. benedict was kneeling             
beside gerard.                                                                     
i headed for the nearest trail into arden. the sea lay at my back,                 
gamath and the black road to the left, kolvir to my right. i had to gain           
some distance before i could work with the stuff of shadow. the day lay            
clean once gamath was lost to sight, several rises and dips later. i struck the    
trail and followed its long curve into the wood, where moist shadows and           
distant bird songs reminded me of the long periods of peace we had known           
of old and the silken, gleaming presence of the maternal unicorn.                  
my aches faded into the rhythm of the ride, and i thought once again of            
the encounter i had departed. it was not difficult to understand gerard’s          
attitude, since he had already told me of his suspicions and issued me a           
warning. still, it was such bad timing for whatever had happened with              
brand that i could not but see it as another action intended either to slow me     
or to stop me entirely. it was fortunate that ganelon had been on hand, in         
good shape, and able to put his fists in the right places at the proper times. i   
wondered what benedict would have done if there had only been the three            
of us present. i’d a feeling he would have waited and intervened only at the       
very last moment, to stop gerard from killing me. i was still not happy with       
our accord, though it was certainly an improvement over the previous state         
of affairs.                                                                        
all of which made me wonder again what had become of brand. had                    
fiona or bleys finally gotten to him? had he attempted his proposed                
assassinations single-handed and been met with a counterthrust, then               
dragged through his intended victim’s trump? had his old allies from the           
courts of chaos somehow gotten through to him? had one of his horny-               
handed guardians from the tower finally been able to reach him? or had it          
been as i had suggested to gerard—an accidental self-injury in a fit of rage,      
followed by an ill tempered flight from amber to do his brooding and               
plotting elsewhere?                                                                
when that many questions arise from a single event the answer is                   
seldom obtainable by pure logic. i had to sort out the possibilities though, to    
have something to reach for when more facts did turn up. in the meantime, i        
thought carefully over everything he had told me, regarding his allegations        
in light of those things which i now knew. with one exception, i did not           
doubt most of the facts. he had built too cleverly to have the edifice simply      
toppled—but then, he had had a lot of time to think these things over. no, it      
was in his manner of presenting events that something had been hidden by           
misdirection. his recent proposal practically assured me of that.                  
the old trail twisted, widened, narrowed again, swung to the northwest             
and downward, into the thickening wood. the forest had changed very                
little. it seemed almost the same trail a young man had ridden centuries           
before, riding for the sheer pleasure of it, riding to explore that vast green     
realm which extended over most of the continent, if he did not stray into          
shadow. it would be good to be doing it again for no reason other than this.       
after perhaps an hour, i had worked my way well back into the forest,              
where the trees were great dark towers, what sunlight i glimpsed caught like       
phoenix nests in their highest branches, an always moist, twilight softness        
smoothing the outlines of stumps and boles, logs and mossy rocks. a deer           
bounded across my path, not trusting to the excellent concealment of a             
thicket at the right of the trail. bird notes sounded about me, never too near.    
occasionally, i crossed the tracks of other horsemen. some of these were           
quite fresh, but they did not stay long with the trail. kolvir was well out of     
sight, had been for some time.                                                     
the trail rose again, and i knew that i would shortly reach the top of a           
small ridge, pass among rocks, and head downward once more. the trees              
thinned somewhat as we climbed, until finally i was afforded a partial view        
of the sky. it was enlarged as i continued, and when i came to the summit i        
heard the distant cry of a hunting bird.                                           
glancing upward, i saw a great dark shape, circling and circling, high             
above me. i hurried past the boulders and shook the reins for a burst of           
speed as soon as the way was clear. we plunged downward, racing to get             
under cover of the larger trees once again.                                        
the bird cried out as we did this, but we won to the shade, to the                 
dimness, without incident. i slowed gradually after that and continued to          
listen, but there were no untoward sounds on the air. this part of the forest      
was pretty much the same as that we had left beyond the ridge, save for a          
small stream we picked up and paralleled for a time, finally crossing it at a      
shallow ford. beyond, the trail widened and a little more light leaked             
through and flowed with us for half a league. we had almost come a                 
sufficient distance for me to begin those small manipulations of shadow            
which would bear me to the pathway back to the shadow earth of my                  
former exile. yet, it would be difficult to begin here, easier farther along. i    
resolved to save the strain on myself and my mount by continuing to a              
better beginning. nothing of a threatening nature had really occurred. the         
bird could be a wild hunter, probably was.                                         
only one thought nagged at me as i rode.                                           
julian…                                                                            
arden was julian’s preserve, patrolled by his rangers, sheltering several          
encampments of his troops at all times—amber’s inland border guard, both           
against incursions natural and against those things which might appear at          
the boundaries of shadow.                                                          
where did julian go when he had departed the palace so suddenly on                 
the night of brand’s stabbing? if he wished simply to hide, there was no           
necessity for him to flee farther than this. here he was strong, backed by his     
own men, moving in a realm he knew far better than the rest of us. it was          
quite possible that he was not, right now, too far away. also, he liked to         
hunt. he had his hellhounds, he had his birds… a half mile, a mile…                
just then, i heard the sound that i feared most. piercing the green and            
the shade, there came the notes of a hunting horn. they came from some             
distance behind me, and i think from the left of the trail.                        
i urged my mount to a gallop and the trees rushed to a blur on either              
side. the trail was straight and level here. we took advantage of this.            
then from behind, i heard a roar—a kind of deepchested coughing,                   
growling sound backed by a lot of resonant lung space. i did not know what         
it was that had littered it, but it was no dog. not even a hellhound sounded       
like that. i glanced back, but there was no pursuit in sight. so i kept low and    
talked to drum a bit.                                                              
after a time, i heard a crashing noise in the woods off to my right, but           
the roar was not repeated just then. i looked again, several times, but i was      
unable to make out what it was that was causing the disturbance. shortly           
thereafter, i heard the horn once more, much nearer, and this time it was          
answered by the barks and the baying which i could not mistake. the                
hellhounds were coming—swift, powerful, vicious beasts julian had found            
in some shadow and trained to the hunt.                                            
it was time, i decided, to begin the shift. amber was still strong about           
me, but i laid hold of shadow as best i could and started the movement.            
the trail began to curve to the left, and as we raced along it the trees at        
either hand diminished in size, fell back. another curve, and the trail led us     
through a clearing, perhaps two hundred meters across. i glanced up then           
and saw that that damned bird was still circling, much nearer now, close           
enough to be dragged with me through shadow.                                       
this was more complicated than i had intended. i wanted an open space              
in which to wheel my mount and swing a blade freely if it came to that. the        
occurrence of such a place, however, revealed my position quite clearly to         
the bird, whom it was proving difficult to lose.                                   
all right. we came to a low hill, mounted it, started downward, passing            
a lone, lightning-blasted tree as we did. on its nearest branch sat a hawk of      
gray and silver and black. i whistled to it as we passed, and it leaped into       
the air, shrieking a savage battle cry.                                            
hurrying on, i heard the individual voices of the dogs clearly now, and            
the thud of the horses’ hoofs. mixed in with these sounds there was                
something else, more a vibration, a shuddering of the ground. i looked back        
again, but none of my pursuit had yet topped the hill. i bent my mind              
toward the way away and clouds occluded the sun. strange flowers                   
appeared along the trail—green and yellow and purple—and there came a              
rumble of distant thunders. the clearing widened, lengthened. it became            
completely level.                                                                  
i heard once again the sound of the horn. i turned for another look.               
it bounded into view then, and i realized at that instant that i was not the       
object of the hunt, that the riders, the dogs, the bird, were pursuing the thing   
that ran behind me. of course, this was a rather academic distinction, in that     
i was in front, and quite possibly the object of its hunt. i leaned forward,       
shouting to drum and digging in with my knees, realizing even as i did that        
the abomination was moving faster than we could. it was a panic reaction.          
i was being pursued by a manticora.                                                
the last time i had seen its like was on the day before the battle in              
which eric died. as i had led my troops up the rearward slopes of kolvir, it       
had appeared to tear a man named rail in half. we had dispatched it with           
automatic weapons. the thing proved twelve feet in length, and like this           
one it had worn a human face on the head and shoulders of a lion; it, too,         
had had a pair of eaglelike wings folded against its sides and the long            
pointed tail of a scorpion curving in the air above it. a number of them had       
somehow wandered in from shadow to devil our steps as we headed for that           
battle. there was no reason to believe all of them had been accounted for,         
save that none had been reported since that time and no evidence of their          
continued existence in the vicinity of amber had come to light. apparently,        
this one had wandered down into arden and been living in the forest since          
that time.                                                                         
a final glance showed me that i might be pulled down in moments if i               
did not make a stand. it also showed me a dark avalanche of dogs rushing           
down the hill.                                                                     
i did not know the intelligence or psychology of the manticora. most               
fleeing beasts will not stop to attack something which is not bothering them.      
self-preservation is generally foremost in their minds. on the other hand, i       
was not certain that the manticora even realized that it was being pursued. it     
might have started out on my trail and only had its own picked up                  
afterward. it might have only the one thing on its mind. it was hardly a time      
to pause and reflect on all the possibilities.                                     
i drew grayswandir and turned my mount to the left, pulling back on                
the reins immediately as he made the turn.                                         
drum screamed and rose high onto his hind legs. i felt myself sliding              
backward, so i jumped to the ground and leaped to the side.                        
but i had, for the moment, forgotten the speed of the storm-hounds, had            
also forgotten how easily they had once overtaken random and myself in             
flora’s mercedes, had also forgotten that unlike ordinary dogs chasing cars,       
they had begun tearing the vehicle apart.                                          
suddenly, they were all over the manticora, a dozen or more dogs,                  
leaping and biting. the beast threw back its head and uttered another cry as       
they struck at it. it swept that vicious tail through them, sending one flying,    
stunning or killing two others. it reared then and turned, striking out with its   
forelegs as it descended.                                                          
but even as it did this, a hound attached itself to its left foreleg, two          
more were at its haunches and one had scrambled onto its back, biting at its       
shoulder and neck. the others were circling it now. as soon as it would go         
after one, the others would dart in and slash at it.                               
it finally caught the one on its back with its scorpion sting and                  
disembowled the one gnawing at its leg. however, it was running blood              
from a double dozen wounds by then. shortly, it became apparent that the           
leg was giving it trouble, both for striking purposes and for bearing its          
weight when it struck with the others. in the meantime, another dog had            
mounted its back and was tearing at its neck. it seemed to be having a more        
difficult time getting at this one. another came in from its right and             
shredded its ear. two more plied its haunches, and when it reared again one        
rushed in and tore at its belly. their barks and growls also seemed to be          
confusing it somewhat, and it began striking wildly at the ever-moving gray        
shapes.                                                                            
i had caught hold of drum’s bridle and was trying to calm him                      
sufficiently to remount and get the hell out of there. he kept trying to rear      
and pull away, and it took considerable persuasion even to hold him in             
place.                                                                             
in the meantime, the manticora let out a bitter, wailing cry. it had struck        
wildly at the dog on its back and driven its sting into its own shoulder. the      
dogs took advantage of this distraction and rushed in wherever there was an        
opening, snapping and tearing.                                                     
i am certain the dogs would have finished it, but at that moment the               
riders topped the hill and descended. there were five of them, julian in the       
lead. he had on his scaled white armor and his hunting horn hung about his         
neck. he rode his gigantic steed morgenstern, a beast which has always             
hated me. he raised the long lance that he bore and saluted with it in my          
direction. then he lowered it and shouted orders to the dogs.                      
grudgingly, they dropped away from the prey. even the dog on the                   
manticora’s back loosened its grip and leaped to the ground. all of them           
drew back as julian couched the lance and touched his spurs to                     
morgenstern’s sides.                                                               
the beast turned toward him, gave a final cry of defiance, and leaped              
ahead, fangs bared. they came together, and for a moment my view was               
blocked by morgenstern’s shoulder. another moment, however, and i knew             
from the horse’s behavior that the blow had been a true one.                       
a turning, and i saw the beast stretched out, great gouts of blood upon            
its breast, flowering about the dark stem of the lance.                            
julian dismounted. he said something to the other riders which i did not           
overhear. they remained mounted. he regarded the still-twitching                   
manticora, then looked at me and smiled. he crossed and placed his foot            
upon the beast, seized the lance with one hand, and wrenched it from the           
carcass. then he drove it into the ground and tethered morgenstern to its          
shaft. he reached up and patted the horse’s shoulder, looked back at me,           
turned, and headed in my direction.                                                
when he came up before me he said, “i wish you hadn’t killed bela.”                
“bela?” i repeated.                                                                
he glanced at the sky. i followed his gaze. neither bird was now in                
sight.                                                                             
“he was one of my favorites.”                                                      
“i am sorry,” i said. “i misunderstood what was going on.”                         
he nodded.                                                                         
“all right. i’ve done something for you. now you can tell me what                  
happened after i left the palace. did brand make it?”                              
“yes,” i said, “and you’re off the hook on that. he claimed fiona                  
stabbed him. and she was not around to question either. she departed               
during the night, also. it’s a wonder you didn’t bump into one another.”           
he smiled.                                                                         
“i’d have guessed as much,” he said.                                               
“why did you flee under such suspicious circumstances?” i asked. “it               
made it look bad for you.”                                                         
he shrugged.                                                                       
“it would not be the first time i’ve been falsely accused, suspected. and          
for that matter, if intent counts for anything, i am as guilty as our little       
sister. i’d have done it myself if i could. in fact, i’d a blade ready the night   
we fetched him back. only, i was crowded aside.”                                   
“but why?” i asked.                                                                
he laughed.                                                                        
“why? i am afraid of the bastard, that’s why. for a long while, i had              
thought he was dead, and certainly hoped so—finally claimed by the dark            
powers he dealt with. how much do you really know about him, corwin?”              
“we had a long talk.”                                                              
“and…?”                                                                            
“he admitted that he and bleys and fiona had formed a plan to claim                
the throne. they would see bleys crowned, but each would share the real            
power. they had used the forces you referred to, to assure dad’s absence.          
brand said that he had attempted to win caine to their cause, but that caine       
had instead gone to you and to eric. the three of you then formed a similar        
cabal to seize power before they could, by placing eric on the throne.”            
he nodded.                                                                         
“the events are in order, but the reason is not. we did not want the               
throne, at least not that abruptly, nor at that time. we formed our group to       
oppose their group, because it had to be opposed to protect the throne. at         
first, the most we could persuade eric to do was to assume a protectorship.        
he was afraid he would quickly turn up dead if he saw himself crowned              
under those conditions. then you turned up, with your very legitimate              
claim. we could not afford to let you press it at that time, because brand’s       
crowd was threatening out-and-out war. we felt they would be less inclined         
to make this move if the throne were already occupied. we could not have           
seated you, because you would have refused to be a puppet, a role you              
would have had to play since the game was already in progress and you              
were ignorant on too many fronts. so we persuaded eric to take the risk and        
be crowned. that was how it happened.”                                             
“so when i did arrive he put out my eyes and threw me in the dungeon               
for laughs.”                                                                       
julian turned away and looked back at the dead manticora.                          
“you are a fool,” he finally said. “you were a tool from the very                  
beginning. they used you to force our hand, and either way you lost. if that       
half-assed attack of bleys’s had somehow succeeded, you wouldn’t have              
lasted long enough to draw a deep breath. if it failed, as it did, bleys           
disappeared, as he did, leaving you with your life forfeit for attempted           
usurpation. you had served your purpose and you had to die. they left us           
small choice m the matter. by rights, we should have killed you—and you            
know it.”                                                                          
i bit my lip. there were many things i might say. but if he was telling            
something approximating the truth, he did have a point. and i did want to          
hear more.                                                                         
“eric,” he said, “figured that your eyesight might eventually be restored          
—knowing the way we regenerate—given time. it was a very delicate                  
situation. if dad were to return, eric could step down and justify all of his      
actions to anyone’s satisfaction—except for killing you. that would have           
been too patent a move to ensure his own continued reign beyond the                
troubles of the moment. and i will tell you frankly that he simply wanted to       
imprison you and forget you.”                                                      
“then whose idea was the blinding?”                                                
he was silent again for a long while. then he spoke very softly, almost            
a whisper: “hear me out, please. it was mine, and it may have saved your           
life. any action taken against you had to be tantamount to death, or their         
faction would have tried for the real thing. you were no longer of any use to      
them, but alive and about you possessed the potentiality of becoming a             
danger at some future time. they could have used your trump to contact             
you and kill you, or they could have used it to free you in order to sacrifice     
you in yet another move against eric. blinded, however, there was no need          
to slay you and you were of no use for anything else they might have in            
mind. it saved you by taking you out of the picture for a time, and it saved       
us from a more egregious act which might one day be held against us. as            
we saw it, there was no choice. it was the only thing we could do. there           
could be no show of leniency either, or we might be suspected of having            
some use for you ourselves. the moment you assumed any such semblance              
of value you would have been a dead man. the most we could do was look             
the other way whenever lord rein contrived to comfort you. that was all            
that could be done.”                                                               
“i see,” i said.                                                                   
“yes,” he agreed, “you saw too soon. no one had guessed you would                  
recover your sight that quickly, nor that you would be able to escape once         
you did. how did you manage it?”                                                   
“does macy’s tell gimbel’s?” i said.                                               
“beg pardon?”                                                                      
“i said—never mind. what do you know of brand’s imprisonment,                      
then?”                                                                             
he regarded me once more.                                                          
“all i know is that there was some sort of falling out within his group. i         
lack the particulars. for some reason, bleys and fiona were afraid to kill         
him and afraid to let him run loose. when we freed him from their                  
compromise—imprisonment—fiona was apparently more afraid of having                 
him free.”                                                                         
“and you said you feared him enough to have made ready to kill him.                
why now, after all this time, when all of this is history and the power has        
shifted again? he was weak, virtually helpless. what harm could he do              
now?”                                                                              
he sighed.                                                                         
“i do not understand the power that he possesses,” he said, “but it is             
considerable. i know that he can travel through shadow with his mind, that         
he can sit in a chair, locate what he seeks in shadow, and then bring it to        
him by an act of will without moving from the chair; and he can travel             
through shadow physically in a somewhat similar fashion. he lays his mind          
upon the place he would visit, forms a kind of mental doorway, and simply          
steps through. for that matter, i believe he can sometimes tell what people        
are thinking. it is almost as if he has himself become some sort of living         
trump. i know these things because i have seen him do them. near the end,          
when we had him under surveillance in the palace he had eluded us once in          
this fashion. this was the time he traveled to the shadow earth and had you        
placed in bedlam. after his recapture, one of us remained with him at all          
times. we did not yet know that he could summon things through shadow,             
however. when he became aware that you had escaped your confinement,               
he summoned a horrid beast which attacked caine, who was then his                  
bodyguard. then he went to you once again. bleys and fiona apparently              
got hold of him shortly after that, before we could, and i did not see him         
again until that night in the library when we brought him back. i fear him         
because he has deadly powers which i do not understand.”                           
“in such a case, i wonder how they managed to confine him at all?”                 
“fiona has similar strengths, and i believe bleys did also. between the            
two of them, they could apparently annul most of brand’s power while they          
created a place where it would be inoperative.”                                    
“not totally,” i said. “he got a message to random. in fact, he reached            
me once, weakly.”                                                                  
“obviously not totally, then,” he said. “sufficiently, however. until we           
broke through the defenses.”                                                       
“what do you know of all their byplay with me—confining me, trying                 
to kill me, saving me.”                                                            
“that i do not understand,” he said, “except that it was part of the               
power struggle within their own group. they had had a falling out amongst          
themselves, and one side or the other had some use for you. so, naturally,         
one side was trying to kill you while the other fought to preserve you.            
ultimately, of course, bleys got the most mileage out of you, in that attack       
he launched.”                                                                      
“but he was the one who tried to kill me, back on the shadow earth,” i             
said. “he was the one who shot out my tires.”                                      
“oh?”                                                                              
“well, that is what brand told me, but it jibes with all sorts of secondary        
evidence.”                                                                         
he shrugged.                                                                       
“i cannot help you on that,” he said. “i simply do not know what was               
going on among them at that time.”                                                 
“yet you countenance fiona in amber,” i said. “in fact, you are more               
than a little cordial to her whenever she is about.”                               
“of course,” he said, smiling. “i have always been very fond of fiona.             
she is certainly the loveliest, most civilized of us all. pity dad was always      
so dead-set against brother-sister marriages, as well you know. it bothered        
me that we had to be adversaries for so long as we were. things returned           
pretty much to normal after bleys’s death, your imprisonment, and eric’s           
coronation, though. she accepted their defeat gracefully, and that was that.       
she was obviously as frightened at the prospect of brand’s return as i was.”       
“brand told things differently,” i said, “but then, of course, he would.           
for one thing, he claims that bleys is still living, that he hunted him down       
with his trump and knows that he is off in shadow, training another force          
for another strike at amber.”                                                      
“i suppose this is possible,” julian said. “but we are more than                   
adequately prepared, are we not?”                                                  
“he claims further that the strike will be a feint,” i continued, “and that        
the real attack will then come direct from the courts of chaos, over the           
black road. he says that fiona is off preparing the way for this right now.”       
he scowled.                                                                        
“i hope he was simply lying,” he said. “i would hate to see their group            
resurrected and at us again, this time with help from the dark direction. and      
i would hate to see fiona involved.”                                               
“brand claimed he was out of it himself, that he had seen the error of             
his ways—and suchlike penitent noises.”                                            
“ha! i’d sooner trust that beast i just slew than take brand at his word. i        
hope you’ve had the sense to keep him well guarded—though this might               
not be of much avail if he has his old powers back.”                               
“but what game could he be playing now?”                                           
“either he has revived the old triumvirate, a thought i like not at all, or        
he has a new plan all his own. but mark me, he has a plan. he has never            
been satisfied to be a mere spectator at anything. he is always scheming.          
i’d take an oath he even plots in his sleep.”                                      
“perhaps you are right,” i said. “you see, there has been a new                    
development, whether for good or ill, i cannot yet tell. i just had a fight        
with gerard. he thinks i have done brand some mischief. this is not the            
case, but i was in no position to prove my innocence. i was the last person i      
know of to see brand, earlier today. gerard visited his quarters a short time      
ago. he says the place is broken up, there are blood smears here and there,        
and brand is missing. i don’t know what to make of it.”                            
“neither do i. but i hope it means someone has done the job properly               
this time.”                                                                        
“lord,” i said, “it’s tangled. i wish i had known all of these things              
before.”                                                                           
“there was never a proper time to tell you,” he said, “until now.                  
certainly not when you were a prisoner and could still be reached, and after       
that you were gone for a long while. when you returned with your troops            
and your new weapons, i was uncertain as to your full intentions. then             
things happened quickly and brand was back again. it was too late. i had to        
get out to save my skin. i am strong here in arden. here, i can take               
anything he can throw at me. i have been maintaining the patrols at full           
battle force and awaiting word of brand’s death. i wanted to inquire of one        
of you whether he was still around. but i could not decide whom to ask,            
thinking myself still suspect should he have died. as soon as i did get word,      
though, should it prove he was still living, i was resolved to have a try at       
him myself. now this… state of affairs… what are you going to do now,              
corwin?”                                                                           
“i am off to fetch the jewel of judgment from a place where i cached it            
in shadow. there is a way it can be used to destroy the black road. i intend       
to try it.”                                                                        
“how can this be done?”                                                            
“that is too long a story, for a horrible thought has just occurred to me.”        
“what is that?”                                                                    
“brand wants the jewel. he was asking about it, and now—this power                 
of his to find things in shadow and fetch them back. how good is it?”              
julian looked thoughtful.                                                          
“he is hardly omniscient, if that is what you mean. you can find                   
anything you want in shadow the normal way we go about it—by traveling             
to it. according to fiona, he just cuts out the footwork. it is therefore an       
object, not a particular object that he summons. besides, that jewel is a very     
strange item from everything eric told me about it. i think brand would            
have to go after it in person, once he finds out where it is.”                     
“then i must get on with my hellride. i have to beat him to it.”                   
“i see you are riding drum,” julian observed. “he is a good beast, a               
sturdy fellow. been through many a hellride.”                                      
“glad to hear that,” i said. “what are you going to do now?”                       
“get in touch with someone in amber and get up to date on everything               
we haven’t had a chance to talk about—benedict, probably.”                         
“no good,” i said. “you will not be able to reach him. he is off to the            
courts of chaos. try gerard, and convince him i am an honorable man                
while you are about it.”                                                           
“the redheads are the only magicians in this family, but i will try… you           
did say the courts of chaos?”                                                      
“yes, but again, the time is too valuable now.”                                    
“of course. get you gone. we will have our leisure later—i trust.”                 
he reached out and clasped my arm. i glanced at the manticora, at the              
dogs seated in a circle about it.                                                  
“thanks, julian. i—you are a difficult man to understand.”                         
“not so. i think the corwin i hated must have died centuries ago. ride             
now, man! if brand shows up around here, i’ll nail his hide to a tree!”            
he shouted an order to his dogs as i mounted, and they fell upon the               
carcass of the manticora, lapping at its blood and tearing out huge chunks         
and strips of flesh. as i rode past that strange, massive, manlike face, i saw     
that its eyes were still open, though glazed. they were blue, and death had        
not robbed them of a certain preternatural innocence. either that, or the look     
was death’s final gift—a senseless way of passing out ironies, if it was.          
i took drum back to the trail and began my hellride.                               
                                                                      
chapter 10                                                                         
moving along the trail at a gentle pace, clouds darkening the sky and              
drum’s whinny of memory or anticipation… a turn to the left, and uphill…           
the ground is brown, yellow, back to brown again… the trees squat down,            
draw apart… grasses wave between them in the cool and rising breeze… a             
quick fire in the sky… a rumble shakes loose raindrops…                            
steep and rocky now… the wind tugs at my cloak… up… up to where                    
the rocks are streaked with silver and the trees have drawn their line… the        
grasses, green fires, die down in the rain… up, to the craggy, sparkling,          
rain-washed heights, where the clouds rush and boil like a mud-gorged river        
at flood crest… the rain stings like buckshot and the wind clears its throat       
to sing… we rise and rise and the crest comes into view, like the head of a        
startled bull, horns guarding the trail… lightnings twist about their tips,        
dance between them… the smell of ozone as we reach that place and rush             
on through, the rain suddenly blocked, the wind shunted away…                      
emerging on the farther side… there is no rain, the air is still, the sky          
smoothed and darkened to a proper star-filled black… meteors cut and               
burn, cut and burn, cauterizing to afterimage scars, fading, fading… moons,        
cast like a handful of coins… three bright dimes, a dull quarter, a pair of        
pennies, one of them tarnished and scarred… down then, that long,                  
winding way… hoof clops clear and metallic in the night air…                       
somewhere, a catlike cough… a dark shape crossing a lesser moon, ragged            
and swift…                                                                         
downward… the land drops away at either hand… darkness below…                      
moving along the top of an infinitely high, curved wall, the way itself            
bright with moonlight… the trail buckles, folds, grows transparent… soon           
it drifts, gauzy, filamentous, stars beneath as well as above… stars below         
on either side… there is no land… there is only the night, night and the           
thin, translucent trail i had to try to ride, to learn how it felt, against some   
future use…                                                                        
it is absolutely silent now, and the illusion of slowness attaches to every        
movement… shortly, the trail falls away, and we move as if swimming                
underwater at some enormous depth, the stars bright fish… it is freedom, it        
is the power of the hellride that brings an elation, like yet unlike the           
recklessness that sometimes comes in battle, the boldness of a risky feat          
well learned, the rush of rightness following the finding of the poem’s            
proper word… it is these and the prospect itself, riding, riding, riding, from     
nowhere to nowhere perhaps, across and among the minerals and fires of             
the void, free of earth and air and water…                                         
we race a great meteor, we touch upon its bulk… speeding across its                
pitted surface, down, around, then up again… it stretches into a great plain,      
it lightens, it yellows…                                                           
it is sand, sand now beneath our movement… the stars fade out as the               
darkness is diluted to a morning full of sunrise… swaths of shade ahead,           
desert trees within them… ride for the dark… crashing through… bright              
birds burst forth, complain, resettle…                                             
among the thickening trees… darker the ground, narrower the way…                   
palm fronds shrink to hand size, barks darken… a twist to the right, a             
widening of the way… our hoofs striking sparks from cobblestones… the              
lane enlarges, becomes a tree-lined street… tiny row houses flash by…              
bright shutters, marble steps, painted screens, set back beyond flagged            
walks… passing, a horse-drawn cart, loaded with fresh vegetables…                  
human pedestrians turning to stare… a small buzz of voices…                        
on… passing beneath a bridge… coursing the stream till it widens to                
river, taking it down to the sea…                                                  
thudding along the beach beneath a lemon sky, blue clouds scudding…                
the salt, the wrack, the shells, the smooth anatomy of driftwood… white            
spray off the lime-colored sea…                                                    
racing, to where the place of waters ends at a terrace… mounting, each             
step crumbling and roaring down behind, losing its identity, joined with the       
boom of the surf… up, up to the flattopped, tree-grown plain, a golden city        
shimmering, miragelike, at its end…                                                
the city grows, darkens beneath a shadowy umbrella, its gray towers                
stretch upward, glass and metal flashing light through the murk… the               
towers begin to sway…                                                              
the city falls in upon itself, soundlessly, as we pass… towers topple,             
dust boils, rises, is pinked by some lower glow… a gentle noise, as of a           
snuffed candle, drifting by…                                                       
a dust storm, quickly falling, giving place to fog… through it, the                
sounds of automobile horns… a drift, a brief lift, a break in the gray-white,      
pearlwhite, shifting… our hoofprints on a shoulder of highway… to the              
right, endless rows of unmoving vehicles… pearl-white, gray-white,                 
drifting again…                                                                    
directionless shrieks and wailings… random flashes of light…                       
rising once more… the fogs lower and ebb… grass, grass, grass…                     
clear now the sky, and delicate blue… a sun racing to set… birds… a cow            
in the field, chewing, staring and chewing…                                        
leaping a wooden fence to ride a country road… a sudden chill beyond               
the hill… the grasses are dry and snow’s on the ground… tin-roofed                 
farmhouse atop a rise, curl of smoke above it…                                     
on… the hills grow up, the sun rolls down, darkness dragged behind…                
a sprinkle of stars… here a house, set far back… there another, long               
driveway wound among old trees… headlights…                                        
off to the side of the road… draw rein and let it pass…                            
i wiped my brow, dusted my shirt front and sleeves. i patted drum’s                
neck. the oncoming vehicle slowed as it neared me, and i could see the             
driver staring. i gave the reins a gentle movement and drum began walking.         
the car braked to a halt and the driver called something after me, but i kept      
going. moments later, i heard him drive off.                                       
it was country road for a time after that. i traveled at an easy pace,             
passing familiar landmarks, recalling other times. a few miles later and i         
came to another road, wider and better. i turned there, staying off on the         
shoulder to the right. the temperature continued to drop, but the cold air         
had a good clean taste to it. a sliced moon shone above the hills to my left.      
there were a few small clouds passing overhead, touched to the moon’s              
quarter with a soft, dusty light. there was very little wind; an occasional        
stirring of branches, no more. after a time, i came to a series of dips in the     
road, telling me i was almost there.                                               
a curve and a couple more dips… i saw the boulder beside the                       
driveway, i read my address upon it.                                               
i drew rein then and looked up the hill. there was a station wagon in the          
driveway and a light on inside the house. i guided drum off the road and           
across a field into a stand of trees. i tethered him behind a pair of              
evergreens, rubbed his neck, and told him i would not be long.                     
i returned to the road. no cars in sight. i crossed over and walked up the         
far side of the driveway, passing behind the station wagon. the only light in      
the house was in the living room, off to the right. i made my way around the       
left side of the house to the rear.                                                
i halted when i reached the patio, looking around. something was                   
wrong.                                                                             
the back yard was changed. a pair of decaying lawn chairs which had                
been leaning against a dilapidated chicken coop i had never bothered to            
remove were gone. so, for that matter, was the chicken coop. they had              
been present the last time i had passed this way. all of the dead tree limbs       
which had previously been strewn about, as well as a rotting mass of them i        
had long ago heaped to cut for firewood, were also gone.                           
the compost heap was missing.                                                      
i moved to the space where it had been. all that was there was an                  
irregular patch of bare earth of the approximate shape of the heap itself.         
but i had discovered in attuning myself to the jewel that i could make             
myself feel its presence. i closed my eyes for a moment and tried to do so.        
nothing.                                                                           
i looked again, searching carefully, but there was no tell-tale glitter            
anywhere in sight. not that i had really expected to see anything, not if i        
could not feel it nearby.                                                          
there had been no curtains in the lighted room. studying the house                 
now, i saw that none of the windows had curtains, shades, shutters, or             
blinds. therefore…                                                                 
i passed around the other end of the house. approaching the first lighted          
window, i glanced in quickly. drop-cloths covered much of the floor. a             
man in cap and coveralls was painting the far wall. of course.                     
i had asked bill to sell the place. i had signed the necessary papers              
while a patient in the local clinic, when i had been projected back to my old      
home—probably by some action of the jewel—on the occasion of my                    
stabbing. that would have been several weeks ago, local time, using the            
amber to shadow earth conversion factor of approximately two and a half            
to one and allowing for the eight days the courts of chaos had cost me in          
amber. bill, of course, had gone ahead on my request. but the place had            
been in bad shape, abandoned as it had been for a number of years,                 
vandalized… it needed some new windowpanes, some roofing work, new                 
guttering, painting, sanding, buffing. and there had been a lot of trash to        
haul away. outside as well as inside…                                              
i turned away and walked down the front slope to the road, recalling my            
last passage this way, half delirious. on mv hands and knees, blood leaking        
from my side. it had been much colder that night and there had been snow           
on the ground and in the air. i passed near the rock where i’d sat, trying to      
flag down a car with a pillow case. the memory was slightly blurred, but i         
still recalled the ones that had passed me by.                                     
i crossed the road. made my way through the field to the trees.                    
unhitching drum, i mounted.                                                        
“we’ve some more riding ahead,” i told him. “not too far this time.”               
we headed back to the road and started along it, continuing on past my             
house. if i had not told bill to go ahead and sell the place, the compost heap     
would still have been there, the jewel would still have been there. i could        
be on my way back to amber with the ruddy stone hung about my neck,                
ready to have a try at what had to be done. now, now i had to go looking           
for it, when i’d a feeling time was beginning to press once again. at least, i     
had a favorable ratio here with respect to its passage in amber. i clucked at      
drum and shook the reins. no sense wasting it, even so.                            
a half hour, and i was into town, riding down a quiet street in a                  
residential area, houses all about me. the lights were on at bill’s place. i       
turned up his driveway. i left drum in his back yard.                              
alice answered my knock, stared a moment, then said. “my god! carl!”               
minutes later, i was seated in the living room with bill, a drink on the           
table to my right. alice was out in the kitchen, having made the mistake of        
asking me whether i wanted something to eat.                                       
bill studied me as he lit his pipe.                                                
“your ways of coming and going still tend to be colorful.” he said. i              
smiled.                                                                            
“expediency is all,” i said.                                                       
“that nurse at the clinic… scarcely anyone believed her story.”                    
“scarcely anyone?”                                                                 
“the minority i refer to is, of course, myself.”                                   
“what was her story?”                                                              
“she claimed that you walked to the center of the room, became two-                
dimensional, and just faded away, like the old soldier that you are, with a        
rainbow-like accompaniment.”                                                       
“glaucoma can cause the rainbow symptom. she ought to have her eyes                
checked.”                                                                          
“she did,” he said. “nothing wrong.”                                               
“oh. too bad. the next thing that comes to mind is neurological.”                  
“come on, carl. she’s all right. you know that.”                                   
i smiled and took a sip of my drink.                                               
“and you,” he said, “you look like a certain playing card i once                   
commented on. complete with sword. what’s going on, carl?”                         
“it’s still complicated,” i said. “even more than the last time we talked.”        
“which means you can’t give me that explanation yet?”                              
i shook my head.                                                                   
“you have won an all-expense tour of my homeland, when this is over,”              
i said, “if i still have a homeland then. right now, time is doing terrible        
things.”                                                                           
“what can i do to help you?”                                                       
“information, please. my old house. who is the guy you have fixing the             
place up?”                                                                         
“ed wellen. local contractor. you know him, i think. didn’t he put in a            
shower for you, or something?”                                                     
“yes, yes he did… i remember.”                                                     
“he’s expanded quite a bit. bought some heavy equipment. has a                     
number of fellows working for him now. i handled his incorporation.”               
“do you know who he’s got working at my place—now?”                                
“offhand, no. but i can find out in just a minute.” he moved his hand to           
rest on the telephone on the side table. “shall i give him a ring?”                
“yes,” i said, “but there is a little more to it than that. there is only one      
thing in which i am really interested. there was a compost heap in the back        
yard. it was there the last time i passed this way. it is gone now. i have to      
find out what became of it.”                                                       
he cocked his head to the right and grinned around his pipe.                       
“you serious?” he finally said.                                                    
“sure as death,” i said. “i hid something in that heap when i crawled by,          
decorating the snow with my precious bodily fluids. i’ve got to have it back       
now.”                                                                              
“just what is it?”                                                                 
“a ruby pendant.”                                                                  
“priceless, i suppose.”                                                            
“you’re right.”                                                                    
he nodded, slowly.                                                                 
“if it were anyone else, i would suspect a practical joke,” he said. “a            
treasure in a compost heap… family heirloom?”                                      
“yes. forty or fifty carats. simple setting. heavy chain.”                         
he removed his pipe and whistled softly.                                           
“mind if i ask why you put it there?”                                              
“i’d be dead now if i hadn’t.”                                                     
“pretty good reason.”                                                              
he reached for the phone again.                                                    
“we’ve had some action on the house already,” he remarked. “pretty                 
good, since i haven’t advertised yet. fellow’d heard from someone who’d            
heard from someone else. i took him over this morning. he’s thinking about         
it. we may move it pretty quick.”                                                  
he began to dial.                                                                  
“wait,” i said. “tell me about him.”                                               
he cradled the phone, looked up.                                                   
“thin guy,” he said. “redhead. had a beard. said he was an artist.                 
wants a place in the country.”                                                     
“son of a bitch!” i said, just as alice came into the room with a tray.            
she made a tsking sound and smiled as she delivered it to me.                      
“just a couple hamburgers and some leftover salad,” she said. “nothing             
to get excited about.”                                                             
“thank you. i was getting ready to eat my horse. i’d have felt bad                 
afterward.”                                                                        
“i don’t imagine he’d have been too happy about it himself. enjoy,” she            
said, and returned to the kitchen.                                                 
“was the compost heap still there when you took him over?” i asked.                
he closed his eyes and furrowed his brow.                                          
“no,” he said after a moment. “the yard was already clear.”                        
“that’s something, anyway,” i said, and i began eating.                            
he made the call, and he talked for several minutes. i got the drift of            
things from his end of the conversation, but i listened to the entire thing        
after he had hung up, while i finished the food and washed it down with            
what was left in my glass.                                                         
“he hated to see good compost go to waste,” bill said. “so he pitched              
the heap into his pickup just the other day and took it out to his farm. he        
dumped it next to a plot he intends to cultivate, and he has not had a chance      
to spread it yet. says he did not notice any jewelry, but then he could easily     
have missed it.”                                                                   
i nodded.                                                                          
“if i can borrow a flashlight, i had better get moving.”                           
“sure. i will drive you out,” he said.                                             
“i do not want to be parted from my horse at this point.”                          
“well, you will probably want a rake, and a shovel or a pitchfork. i can           
drive them out and meet you there, if you know where the place is.”                
“i know where ed’s place is. he must have tools, though.”                          
bill shrugged and smiled.                                                          
“all right,” i said. “let me use your bathroom, and then we had better             
get moving.”                                                                       
“you seemed as if you knew the prospective buyer.”                                 
i put the tray aside and rose to my feet.                                          
“you heard of him last as brandon corey.”                                          
“the guy who pretended to be your brother and got you committed?”                  
“ ‘pretended’ hell! he is my brother. no fault of mine, though. excuse             
me.”                                                                               
“he was there.”                                                                    
“where?”                                                                           
“ed’s place, this afternoon. at least a bearded redhead was.”                      
“doing what?”                                                                      
“said he was an artist. said he wanted permission to set up his easel and          
paint in one of the fields.”                                                       
“and ed let him?”                                                                  
“yes, of course. thought it was a great idea. that is why he told me               
about it. wanted to brag.”                                                         
“get the stuff. i will meet you there.”                                            
“right.”                                                                           
the second thing i took out in the bathroom was my trumps. i had to                
reach someone in amber soonest, someone strong enough to stop him. but             
who? benedict was on his way to the courts at chaos, random was off                
looking for his son, i had just parted with gerard on somewhat less than           
amicable terms. i wished that i had a trump for ganelon. i decided that i          
would have to try gerard.                                                          
i drew forth his card, performed the proper mental maneuvers. moments              
later, i had contact.                                                              
“corwin!”                                                                          
“just listen, gerard! brand is alive, if that is any consolation. i’m damn         
sure of that. this is important. life and death. you’ve got to do something        
fast!”                                                                             
his expressions had changed rapidly while i had spoken—anger,                      
surprise, interest…                                                                
“go ahead,” he said.                                                               
“brand could be coming back very soon. in fact, he may already be in               
amber. you haven’t seen him yet, have you?”                                        
“no.”                                                                              
“he must be stopped from walking the pattern.”                                     
“i do not understand. but i can post a guard outside the chamber of the            
pattern.”                                                                          
“put the guard inside the chamber. he has strange ways of coming and               
going now. terrible things may happen if he walks the pattern.”                    
“i will watch it personally then. what is happening?”                              
“no time now. here is the next thing: is llewella back in rebma?”                  
“yes, she is.”                                                                     
“get hold of her with her trump. she’s got to warn moire that the                  
pattern in rebma has to be guarded also.”                                          
“how serious is this, corwin?”                                                     
“it could be the end of everything,” i said. “i have to go now.”                   
i broke the contact and headed for the kitchen and the back door,                  
stopping only long enough to thank alice and say good night. if brand had          
got hold of the jewel and attuned himself to it, i was not certain what he         
would do, but i had a pretty strong hunch.                                         
i mounted drum and turned him toward the road. bill was already                    
backing out of the driveway.                                                       
                                                                      
chapter 11                                                                         
i cut through fields in many places where bill had to follow the roads, so i       
was not all that far behind him. when i drew up, he was talking with ed,           
who was gesturing toward the southwest.                                            
as i dismounted, ed was studying drum.                                             
“nice horse, that,” he said.                                                       
“thanks.”                                                                          
“you’ve been away.”                                                                
“yes.”                                                                             
we shook hands.                                                                    
“good to see you again. i was just telling bill that i don’t really know           
how long that artist stayed around. i just figured he would go away when it        
got dark, and i didn’t pay too much attention. now, if he was really looking       
for something of yours and knew about the compost heap, he could still be          
out there for all i know. i’ll get my shotgun, if you like, and go with you.”      
“no,” i said, “thanks. i think i know who it was. the gun will not be              
necessary. we’ll just walk over and do a little poking around.”                    
“okay,” he said. “let me come along and give you a hand.”                          
“you don’t have to do that,” i said.                                               
“how about your horse, then? what say i give him a drink and                       
something to eat, clean him up a bit?”                                             
“i’m sure he’d be grateful. i know i would.”                                       
“what’s his name?”                                                                 
“drum.”                                                                            
he approached drum and began making friends with him.                              
“okay,” he said. “i’ll be back in the barn for a while. if you need me for         
anything, just holier.”                                                            
“thanks.”                                                                          
i got the tools out of bill’s car and he carried the electric lantern,             
leading me off to the southwest where ed had been pointing earlier.                
as we crossed the field, i followed the beam of bill’s light, searching            
for the heap. when i saw what might be the remains of one, i drew a deep           
breath, involuntarily. someone must have been at it, the way the clods were        
strewn about. the mass would not have been dumped from a truck to fall in          
such a dispersed fashion.                                                          
still… the fact that someone had looked did not mean he had located                
what he had been seeking.                                                          
“what do you think?” bill said.                                                    
“i don’t know,” i told him, lowering the tools to the ground and                   
approaching the largest aggregate in sight. “give me some light here.”             
i scanned what remained of the heap, then fetched a rake and began                 
taking it apart. i broke each clod and spread it upon the ground, running the      
tines through it. after a time. bill set the lantern at a good angle and moved     
to help me.                                                                        
“i’ve got a funny feeling…” he said.                                               
“so do i.”                                                                         
“…that we may be too late.”                                                        
we kept pulverizing and spreading, pulverizing and spreading…                      
i felt the tingle of a familiar presence. i straightened and waited.               
contact came moments later.                                                        
“corwin!”                                                                          
“here, gerard.”                                                                    
“what’d you say?” said bill.                                                       
i raised my hand to silence him and gave my attention to gerard. he                
stood in shadow at the bright beginning of the pattern, leaning upon his           
great blade.                                                                       
“you were right,” he said. “brand did show up here, just a moment ago.             
i am not sure how he got in. he stepped out of the shadows off to the left,        
there.” he gestured. “he looked at me for a moment, then turned around             
and walked back. he did not answer when i hailed him. so i turned up the           
lantern, but he was nowhere in sight. he just disappeared. what do you             
want me to do now?”                                                                
“was he wearing the jewel of judgment?”                                            
“i could not tell. i only had sight of him for a moment, in this bad light.”       
“are they watching the pattern in rebma now?”                                      
“yes. llewella’s alerted them.”                                                    
“good. stay on guard, then. i will be in touch again.”                             
“all right. corwin—about what happened earlier…”                                   
“forget it.”                                                                       
“thanks. that ganelon is one tough fellow.”                                        
“indeed,” i said. “stay awake.”                                                    
his image faded as i released the contact, but a strange thing happened            
then. the sense of contact, the path, remained with me, objectless, open,          
like a switched on radio not tuned to anything. bill was looking at me             
peculiarly.                                                                        
“carl, what is happening?”                                                         
“i don’t know. wait a minute.”                                                     
suddenly, there was contact again, though not with gerard. she must                
have been trying to reach me while my attention was diverted.                      
“corwin, it is important…”                                                         
“go ahead, fi.”                                                                    
“you will not find what you are looking for there. brand has it.”                  
“i was beginning to suspect as much.”                                              
“we have to stop him. i do not know how much you know—”                            
“neither do i any more,” i said, “but i have the pattern in amber and              
the one in rebma under guard. gerard just told me that brand appeared at           
the one in amber, but was scared off.”                                             
she nodded her small, fine-featured face. her red tresses were unusually           
disarrayed. she looked tired.                                                      
“i am aware of this,” she said. “i have him under surveillance. but you            
have forgotten another possibility.”                                               
“no,” i said. “according to my calculations, tir-na nog’th should not              
be attainable yet—”                                                                
“that is not what i was referring to. he is headed for the primal pattern          
itself.”                                                                           
“to attune the jewel?”                                                             
“the first time through,” she said.                                                
“to walk it, he would have to pass through the damaged area. i gather              
that is more than a little difficult.”                                             
“so you do know about it,” she said. “good. that saves time. the dark              
area would not trouble him the way it would another of us. he has come to          
terms with that darkness. we must stop him, now.”                                  
“do you know any short cuts to that place?”                                        
“yes. come to me. i will take you there.”                                          
“just a minute. i want drum with me.”                                              
“what for?”                                                                        
“no telling. that is why i want him.”                                              
“very well. then bring me through. we can as easily depart from there              
as from here.”                                                                     
i extended my hand. in a moment, i held hers. she stepped forward.                 
“lord!” said bill, drawing back. “you were giving me doubts about                  
your sanity, carl. now it’s mine i wonder about. she—she’s on one of the           
cards, too, isn’t she?”                                                            
“yes. bill, this is my sister fiona. fiona, this is bill roth, a very good         
friend.”                                                                           
fi extended her hand and smiled, and i left them there while i went back           
to fetch drum. a few minutes later, i led him forth.                               
“bill,” i said, “i am sorry to have wasted your time. my brother has the           
thing. we are going after him now. thanks for helping me.”                         
i shook his hand.                                                                  
he said, “corwin.” i smiled.                                                       
“yes, that is my name.”                                                            
“we have been talking, your sister and i. not much i could learn in a              
few minutes, but i know it is dangerous. so good luck. i still want the            
whole story one day.”                                                              
“thanks,” i said. “i will try to see that you get it.”                             
i mounted, leaned down, and drew fiona up before me.                               
“good night, mr. roth,” she said. then, to me, “start riding, slowly,              
across the field.”                                                                 
i did.                                                                             
“brand says you are the one who stabbed him,” i said, as soon as we                
had gone far enough to feel alone.                                                 
“that’s right.”                                                                    
“why?”                                                                             
“to avoid all this.”                                                               
“i talked with him for a long while. he claimed it was originally you,             
bleys, and himself, together in a scheme to seize power.”                          
“that is correct.”                                                                 
“he told me he had approached caine, trying to win him to your side,               
but that caine would have none of it, that caine had passed the word along         
to eric and julian. and this led to their forming their own group, to block        
your way to the throne.”                                                           
“that is basically correct. caine had ambitions of his own—long-term               
ones—but ambitions nevertheless. he was in no position to pursue them,             
however. so he decided that if his lot was to be a lesser one, he would            
rather serve it under eric than under bleys. i can see his point, too.”            
“he also claimed that the three of you had a deal going with the powers            
at the end of the black road, in the courts of chaos.”                             
“yes,” she said, “we did.”                                                         
“you use the past tense.”                                                          
“for myself and for bleys, yes.”                                                   
“that is not the way brand tells it.”                                              
“he wouldn’t.”                                                                     
“he said you and bleys wanted to continue exploiting that alliance, but            
that he had had a change of heart. because of this, he claims you turned on        
him and imprisoned him in that tower.”                                             
“why didn’t we just kill him?”                                                     
“i give up. tell me.”                                                              
“he was too dangerous to be allowed his freedom, but we could not kill             
him either because he held something vital.”                                       
“what?”                                                                            
“with dworkin gone. brand was the only one who knew how to undo                    
the damage he had done to the primal pattern.”                                     
“you had a long time to get that information out of him.”                          
“he possesses unbelievable resources.”                                             
“then why did you stab him?”                                                       
“i repeat, to avoid all this. if it became a question of his freedom or his        
death, it were better he died. we would have to take our chances on figuring       
the method of repairing the pattern.”                                              
“this being the case, why did you consent to cooperate in bringing him             
back?”                                                                             
“first, i was not co-operating, i was trying to impede the attempt. but            
there were too many trying too hard. you got through to him in spite of me.        
second, i had to be on hand to try to kill him in the event you succeeded.         
too bad things worked out the way they did.”                                       
“you say that you and bleys had second thoughts about the alliance, but            
that brand did not?”                                                               
“yes.”                                                                             
“how did your second thoughts affect your desire for the throne?”                  
“we thought we could manage it without any additional outside help.”               
“i see.”                                                                           
“do you believe me?”                                                               
“i’m afraid that i am beginning to.”                                               
“turn here.”                                                                       
i entered a cleft in a hillside. the way was narrow and very dark, with            
only a small band of stars above us. fiona had been manipulating shadow            
while we had talked, leading us from ed’s field downward, into a misty,            
moorlike place, then up again, to a clear and rocky trail among mountains.         
now, as we moved through the dark defile, i felt her working with shadow           
again. the air was cool but not cold. the blackness to our left and our right      
was absolute, giving the illusion of enormous depths, rather than nearby           
rock cloaked in shadow. this impression was reinforced, i suddenly                 
realized, by the fact that drum’s hoofbeats were not producing any echoes,         
aftersounds, overtones.                                                            
“what can i do to gain your trust?” she said.                                      
“that’s asking quite a bit.”                                                       
she laughed.                                                                       
“let me rephrase it. what can i do to convince you i am telling the                
truth?”                                                                            
“just answer one question.”                                                        
“what?”                                                                            
“who shot out my tires?”                                                           
she laughed again.                                                                 
“you’ve figured it out, haven’t you?”                                              
“maybe. you tell me.”                                                              
“brand,” she said. “he had failed in his effort to destroy your memory,            
so he decided he had better do a more thorough job.”                               
“the version i had of the story was that bleys had done the shooting               
and left me in the lake, that brand had arrived in time to drag me out and         
save my life. in fact, the police report seemed to indicate something to that      
effect.”                                                                           
“who called the police?” she asked.                                                
“they had it listed as an anonymous call, but—”                                    
“bleys called them. he couldn’t reach you in time to save you, once he             
realized what was happening. he hoped that they could. fortunately, they           
did.”                                                                              
“what do you mean?”                                                                
“brand did not drag you out of the wreck. you did it yourself. he                  
waited around to be certain you were dead, and you surfaced and pulled             
yourself ashore. he went down and was checking you over, to decide                 
whether you would die if he just left you there or whether he should throw         
you back in again. the police arrived about then and he had to clear out. we       
caught up with him shortly afterward and were able to subdue him and               
imprison him in the tower. that took a lot of doing. later, i contacted eric       
and told him what had happened. he then ordered flora to put you in the            
other place and see that you were held until after his coronation.”                
“it fits,” i said. “thanks.”                                                       
“what does it fit?”                                                                
“i was only a small-town gp in simpler times than these, and i never               
had much to do with psychiatric cases. but i do know that you don’t give a         
person electroshock therapy to restore memories. est generally does just           
the opposite. it destroys some of the short term ones. my suspicions began         
to stir when i learned that that was what brand had had done to me. so i           
came up with my own hypothesis. the auto wreck did not restore my                  
memories, and neither did the est. i had finally begun recovering them             
naturally, not as the result of any particular trauma. i must have done            
something or said something to indicate that this was occurring. word of it        
somehow got to brand and he decided that this would not be a good thing to         
have happen at that time. so he journeyed to my shadow and managed to              
get me committed and subjected to treatment which he hoped would wipe              
out those things i had recently recovered. this was just partly successful, in     
that its only lasting effect was to fuzz me up for the few days surrounding        
the sessions. the accident may have contributed, too. but when i escaped           
from porter and lived through his attempt to kill me, the process of recovery      
continued after i regained consciousness in greenwood and left the place. i        
was remembering more and more when i was staying at flora’s. the                   
recovery was accelerated by random’s taking me to rebma, where i                   
walked the pattern. if this had not occurred, however, i am convinced now          
that it would all have come back, anyway. it might have taken somewhat             
longer, but i had broken through and the remembering was an ongoing                
process, coming faster and faster near the end. so i concluded that brand          
was trying to sabotage me, and that is what fits the things you just told me.”     
the band of stars had narrowed, and it finally vanished above us. we               
advanced through what seemed a totally black tunnel now, with perhaps the          
tiniest flickering of light a great distance ahead of us.                          
“yes,” she said in the darkness before me, “you guessed correctly.                 
brand was afraid of you. he claimed he had seen your return one night in           
tir-na nog’th, to the undoing of all our plans. i paid him no heed at the          
time, for i was not even aware you still lived. it must have been then that he     
set out to find you. whether he divined your whereabouts by some arcane            
means or simply saw it in eric’s mind, i do not know. probably the latter.         
he is occasionally capable of such a feat. however he located you, you now         
know the rest.”                                                                    
“it was flora’s presence in that place and her strange liaison with eric           
that first made him suspicious. or so he said. not that it matters, now. what      
do you propose doing with him if we get our hands on him?”                         
she chuckled.                                                                      
“you are wearing your blade,” she said.                                            
“brand told me, not all that long ago, that bleys is still alive. is this          
true?”                                                                             
“yes.”                                                                             
“then why am i here, rather than bleys?”                                           
“bleys is not attuned to the jewel. you are. you interact with it at near          
distances, and it will attempt to preserve your life if you are in imminent        
danger of losing it. the risk, therefore, is not as great,” she said.              
then, moments later, “don’t take it for granted, though. a swift stroke            
can still beat its reaction. you can die in its presence.”                         
the light ahead grew larger, brighter, but there were no drafts, sounds,           
or smells from that direction. advancing, i thought of the layers upon layers      
of explanations i had received since my return, each with its own complex          
of motivations, justifications for what had happened while i was away, for         
what had happened since, for what was happening now. the emotions, the             
plans, the feelings, the objectives i had seen swirled like floodwater through     
the city of facts i was slowly erecting on the grave of my other self, and         
though an act is an act, in the best steinian tradition, each wave of              
interpretation that broke upon me shifted the position of one or more things       
i had thought safely anchored, and by this brought about an alteration of the      
whole, to the extent that all of life seemed almost a shifting interplay of        
shadow about the amber of some never to be attained truth. still, i could          
not deny that i knew more now than i had several years earlier, that i was         
closer to the heart of matters than i had been before, that the entire action in   
which i had been caught up upon my return seemed now to be sweeping                
toward some final resolution. and what did i want? a chance to find out            
what was right and a chance to act on it! i laughed. who is ever granted the       
first, let alone the second of these? a workable approximation of truth,           
then. that would be enough… and a chance to swing my blade a few times             
in the right direction: the highest compensation i could receive from a one        
o’clock world for the changes wrought since noon. i laughed again and              
made sure my blade was loose in the sheath.                                        
“brand said that bleys had raised another army—” i began.                          
“later,” she said, “later. there is no more time.”                                 
and she was right. the light had grown large, become a circular                    
opening. it had approached at a rate out of proportion to our advance, as          
though the tunnel itself were contracting. it seemed to be daylight that was       
rushing in through what i chose to regard as the cave mouth.                       
“all right,” i said, and moments later we reached the opening and                  
passed through it.                                                                 
i blinked my eyes as we emerged. to my left was the sea, which seemed              
to merge with the same-colored sky. the golden sun which floated/hung              
above/within it, bounced beams of brilliance from all directions. behind           
me, now, there was nothing but rock. our passage to this place had                 
vanished without a sign. not too far below and before me—perhaps a                 
hundred feet distant—lay the primal pattern. a figure was negotiating the          
second of its outer arcs, his attention so confined by this activity that he had   
apparently not yet noted our presence. a flash of red as he took a turn: the       
jewel, hanging now from his neck as it had hung from mine, from eric’s,            
from dad’s. the figure, of course, was brand’s.                                    
i dismounted. i looked up at fiona, small and distraught, and i placed             
drum’s reins in her hand.                                                          
“any advice, other than to go after him?” i whispered.                             
she shook her head.                                                                
turning then, i drew grayswandir and strode forward.                               
“good luck,” she said softly.                                                      
as i walked toward the pattern, i saw the long chain leading from the              
cave mouth to the now still form of the griffin wixer. wixer’s head lay on         
the ground several paces to the left of his body. body and head both leaked        
a normal-colored blood upon the stone.                                             
as i approached the beginning of the pattern, i did a quick calculation.           
brand had already taken several turns about the general spiral of the design.      
he was approximately two and a half laps into it. if we were only separated        
by one winding, i could reach him with my blade once i achieved a position         
paralleling his own. the going, however, got rougher the further one               
penetrated the design. consequently, brand was moving at a steadily                
decreasing pace. so it would be close. i did not have to catch him. i just had     
to pick up a lap and a half and obtain a position across from him.                 
i placed my foot upon the pattern and moved forward, as fast as i was              
able. the blue sparks began about my feet as i rushed through the first            
curve against the rising resistance. the sparks grew quickly. my hair was          
beginning to rise when i hit the first veil, and the crackling of the sparks       
was quite audible now. i pushed on against the pressure of the veil,               
wondering whether brand had noticed me yet, unable to afford the                   
distraction of a glance in his direction just then. i met the resistance with      
increased force, and several steps later i was through the veil and moving         
more easily again.                                                                 
i looked up. brand was just emerging from the terrible second veil,                
blue sparks as high as his waist. he was grinning a grin of resolve and            
triumph as he pulled free and took a clear step forward. then he saw me.           
the grin went away and he hesitated, a point in my favor. you never                
stop on the pattern if you can help it. if you do, it costs a lot of extra energy  
to get moving again.                                                               
“you are too late!” he called out.                                                 
i did not answer him. i just kept going. blue fires fell from the pattern          
tracery along grayswandir’s length.                                                
“you will not make it through the black,” he said.                                 
i kept going. the dark area was just ahead of me now. i was glad that it           
had not occurred over one of the more difficult portions of the pattern this       
time around. brand moved forward and slowly began his movement toward              
the grand curve. if i could catch him there, it would be no contest. he            
would not have the strength or the speed to defend himself.                        
as i approached the damaged portion of the pattern, i recalled the                 
means by which ganelon and i had cut the black road on our flight from             
avalon. i had succeeded in breaking the power of the road by holding the           
image of the pattern in my mind as we had gone across. now, of course, i           
had the pattern itself all around me, and the distance was not nearly so           
great. while my first thought had been that brand was simply trying to             
rattle me with his threat, it occurred to me that the force of the dark place      
might well be much stronger here at its source. as i came up to it,                
grayswandir blazed with a sudden intensity which outshone its previous             
light. on an impulse, i touched its point to the edge of the blackness, at the     
place where the pattern ended.                                                     
grayswandir clove to the blackness and could not be raised above it. i             
continued forward, and my blade sliced the area before me, sliding ahead in        
what seemed an approximation of the original tracery. i followed. the sun          
seemed to darken as i trod the dark ground. i was suddenly conscious of my         
heartbeat, and perspiration formed on my brow. a grayish cast fell over            
everything. the world seemed to dim, the pattern to fade. it seemed it             
would be easy to step amiss in this place, and i was not certain whether the       
result would be the same as a misstep within the intact portions of the            
pattern. i did not want to find out.                                               
i kept my eyes low, following the line grayswandir was inscribing                  
before me, the blade’s blue fire now the only thing of color left to the world.    
right foot, left foot…                                                             
then suddenly i was out of it and grayswandir swung free in my hand                
once again, the fires partly diminished, whether by contrast with the              
reilluminated prospect or for some other reasons i did not know.                   
looking about, i saw that brand was approaching the grand curve. as                
for me, i was working my way toward the second veil. we would both be              
involved in the strenuous efforts these entailed in a few more minutes. the        
grand curve is more difficult, more prolonged than the second veil,                
however. i should be free and moving more quickly again before he worked           
his way through his barrier. then i would have to cross the damaged area           
another time. he might be free by then, but he would be moving more                
slowly than i would, for he would be into the area where the going becomes         
even more difficult.                                                               
a steady static arose with each step that i took, and a tingling sensation         
permeated my entire body. the sparks rose to midthigh as i moved. it was           
like striding through a field of electric wheat. my hair was at least partly       
risen by then. i could feel its stirring. i glanced back once to see fiona, still  
mounted, unmoving, watching.                                                       
i pressed ahead to the second veil.                                                
angles… short, sharp turns… the force rose and rose against me, so                 
that all of my attention, all of my strength, was now occupied in striving         
against it. there came again that familiar sense of timelessness, as though        
this was all i had ever done, all that i ever would do. and will… a focusing       
of desire to such an intensity that everything else was excluded… brand,           
fiona, amber, my own identity… the sparks rose to even greater heights as          
i struggled, turned, labored, each step requiring more effort than the             
previous one.                                                                      
i pushed through. right into the black area again.                                 
reflexively, i moved grayswandir down and ahead once more. again,                  
the grayness, the monochrome fog, cut by the blue of my blade opening the          
way before me like a surgical incision.                                            
when i emerged into normal light, i sought brand. he was still in the              
western quadrant, struggling with the grand curve, about two thirds of the         
way through it. if i pushed hard, i might be able to catch him just as he was      
coming out of it. i threw all of my strength into moving as quickly as             
possible.                                                                          
as i made it to the north end of the pattern and into the curve leading            
back, it struck me suddenly what i was about to do.                                
i was rushing to spill more blood upon the pattern.                                
if it came to a simple choice between further damage to the pattern and            
brand’s destroying it utterly, then i knew what i had to do. yet, i felt there     
had to be another way. yes…                                                        
i slowed my pace just a trifle. it was going to be a matter of timing, his         
passage was a lot rougher than mine just then, so i had an edge in that            
respect. my entire new strategy involved arranging our encounter at just the       
right point. ironically, at that moment, i recalled brand’s concern for his        
rug. the problem of keeping this place clean was a lot trickier, though.           
he was nearing the end of the grand curve, and i paced him while                   
calculating the distance to the blackness. i had decided to let him do his         
bleeding over the area which had already been damaged. the only                    
disadvantage i seemed to possess was that i would be situated to brand’s           
right. to minimize the benefit this would give him when we crossed blades,         
i would have to remain somewhat to the rear.                                       
brand struggled and advanced, all of his movements in slow motion. i               
struggled too, but not as hard. i kept the pace. i wondered as i went, about       
the jewel, about the affinity we had shared since the attunement. i could          
feel its presence, there to my left and ahead, even though i could not see it      
now upon brand’s breast. would it really act to save me across that distance       
should brand gain the upper hand in our coming conflict? feeling its               
presence, i could almost believe that it would. it had torn me from one            
assailant and found, somehow, within my mind, a traditional place of safety        
—my own bed—and had transported me there. feeling it now, almost                   
seeing the way before brand through it, i felt some assurance that it would        
attempt to function on my behalf once again. recalling fiona’s words,              
however, i was determined not to rely on it. still, i considered its other         
functions, speculated upon my ability to operate it without contact…               
brand had almost completed the grand curve. i reached out from some                
level of my being and made contact with the jewel. laying my will upon it,         
i called for a storm of the red tornado variety which had destroyed iago. i        
did not know whether i could control that particular phenomenon in this            
particular place, but i called for it nevertheless and directed it toward          
brand. nothing happened immediately, though i felt the jewel functioning           
to achieve something. brand came to the end, offered a final exertion, and         
passed from the grand curve.                                                       
i was right there behind him.                                                      
he knew it, too—somehow. his blade was out the instant the pressure                
was off. he gained a couple feet faster than i thought he could, got his left      
foot ahead of him, turned his body, and met my gaze over the lines of our          
blades.                                                                            
“damned if you didn’t make it.” he said, touching the tip of my blade              
with his own.                                                                      
“you would never have gotten here this soon if it weren’t for the bitch            
on the horse, though.”                                                             
“nice way to talk about our sister,” i said, feinting and watching him             
move to parry.                                                                     
we were hampered, in that neither of us could lunge without departing              
the pattern. i was further hampered in not wanting to make him bleed, yet. i       
faked a stop thrust and he drew back, sliding his left foot along the design       
to his rear. he withdrew his right then, stamped it, and tried a head cut          
without preliminaries. damn it! i parried and then riposted by pure reflex. i      
did not want to catch him with the chest cut i had thrown back at him, but         
the tip of grayswandir traced an arc beneath his sternum. i heard a                
humming in the air above us. i could not afford to take my eyes off brand,         
though. he glanced downward and backed some more. good. a red line                 
now decorated his shirt front where my cut had taken him. so far, the              
material seemed to be absorbing it. i stamped, feinted, thrust, parried, stop      
thrust, bound, and unbound—everything i could think of to keep him                 
retreating. i had the psychological edge on him in that i had the greater          
reach and we both knew i could do more things with it, more quickly.               
brand was nearing the dark area. just a few more paces… i heard a sound            
like a single bell chime, followed by a great roaring. a shadow suddenly           
fell upon us, as though a cloud had just occluded the sun.                         
brand glanced up. i think i could have gotten him just then, but he was            
still a couple of feet too far from the target area.                               
he recovered immediately and glared at me.                                         
“damn you, corwin! that’s yours, isn’t it?” he cried, and then he                  
attacked, discarding what caution he still possessed.                              
unfortunately, i was in a bad position, as i had been edging up on him,            
preparing to press him the rest of the way back. i was exposed and slightly        
off-balance. even as i parried, i realized it would not be sufficient, and i       
twisted and fell back.                                                             
i struggled to keep my feet in place as i went down. i caught myself               
with my right elbow and my left hand. i cursed, as the pain was too much           
and my elbow slid to the side, dropping me to my right shoulder.                   
but brand’s thrust had gone by me, and within blue halos my feet still             
touched the line. i was out of brand’s reach for a death thrust, though he         
could still hamstring me.                                                          
i raised my right arm, still clutching grayswandir, before me. i began to          
sit up. as i did, i saw that the red formation, yellow about the edges, was        
now spinning directly above brand, crackling with sparks and small                 
lightnings, its roar now changed to a wailing.                                     
brand took hold of his blade by the forte and raised it above his                  
shoulder like a spear, pointed in my direction. i knew that i could not parry      
it, that i could not dodge it.                                                     
with my mind, i reached out to the jewel and up to the formation in the            
sky…                                                                               
there came a bright flash as a small finger of lightning reached down              
and touched his blade…                                                             
the weapon fell from his hand and his hand flew to his mouth. with his             
left hand, he clutched at the jewel of judgment, as if he realized what i was      
doing and sought to nullify it by covering the stone. sucking his fingers, he      
looked upward, all of the anger draining from his face to be replaced by a         
look of fear verging on terror.                                                    
the cone was beginning to descend.                                                 
turning then, he stepped onto the blackened area, faced south, raised              
both his arms and cried out something i could not hear above the wailing.          
the cone fell toward him, but he seemed to grow two-dimensional as it              
approached. his outline wavered. he began to shrink—but it did not seem a          
function of actual size, so much as an effect of distancing. he dwindled,          
dwindled, was gone, a bare instant before the cone licked across the area he       
had occupied.                                                                      
with him went the jewel, so that i was left with no way of controlling             
the thing above me. i did not know whether it was better to maintain a low         
profile or to resume a normal stance on the pattern. i decided on the latter,      
because the whirlwind seemed to go for things which broke the normal               
sequence. i got back into a sitting position and edged over to the line. then      
i leaned forward into a crouch, by which time the cone began to rise. the          
wailing retreated down the scale as it withdrew. the blue fires about my           
boots had subsided completely. i turned and looked at fiona. she motioned          
me to get up and go on.                                                            
so i rose slowly, seeing that the vortex above me continued to dissipate           
as i moved. advancing upon the area where brand had so recently stood, i           
once again used grayswandir to guide me through. the twisted remains of            
brand’s blade lay near the far edge of the dim place.                              
i wished there were some easy way out of the pattern. it seemed                    
pointless to complete it now. but there is no turning back once you have set       
foot upon it, and i was extremely leery of trying the dark route out. so i         
headed on toward the grand curve. to what place, i wondered, had brand             
taken himself? if i knew, i could command the pattern to send me after him,        
once i reached the center. perhaps fiona had an idea. still, he would              
probably head for a place where he had allies. it would be senseless to            
pursue him alone.                                                                  
at least i had stopped the attunement, i consoled myself.                          
then i entered the grand curve. the sparks shot up about me.                       
                                                                      
chapter 12                                                                         
late afternoon on a mountain: the westering sun shone full on the rocks to         
my left, tailored long shadows for those to the right; it filtered through the     
foliage about my tomb; it countered to some extent the chill winds of              
kolvir. i released random’s hand and turned to regard the man who sat on           
the bench before the mausoleum.                                                    
it was the face of the youth on the pierced trump, lines now drawn                 
above the mouth, brow heavier, a general weariness in eye movement and             
set of jaw which had not been apparent on the card.                                
so i knew it before random said, “this is my son martin.”                          
martin rose as i approached him, clasped my hand, said, “uncle                     
corwin.” his expression changed but slightly as he said it. he scrutinized         
me.                                                                                
he was several inches taller than random, but of the same light build.             
his chin and cheekbones had the same general cut to them, his hair was of a        
similar texture.                                                                   
i smiled.                                                                          
“you have been away a long while,” i said. “so was i.”                             
he nodded.                                                                         
“but i have never really been in amber proper,” he said. “i grew up in             
rebma—and other places.”                                                           
“then let me welcome you, nephew. you come at an interesting time.                 
random must have told you about it.”                                               
“yes,” he said. “that is why i asked to meet you here, rather than                 
there.”                                                                            
i glanced at random.                                                               
“the last uncle he met was brand,” random said, “and under very nasty              
circumstances. do you blame him?”                                                  
“hardly. i ran into him myself a bit earlier. can’t say it was the most            
rewarding encounter.”                                                              
“ran into him?” said random. “you’ve lost me.”                                     
“he has left amber and he has the jewel of judgment with him. if i had             
known earlier what i know now, he would still be in the tower. he is our           
man, and he is very dangerous.”                                                    
random nodded.                                                                     
“i know,” he said. “martin confirmed all our suspicions on the stabbing            
—and it was brand. but what is this about the jewel?”                              
“he beat me to the place where i had left it on the shadow earth. he has           
to walk the pattern with it and project himself through it, though, to attune      
it to his use. i just stopped him from doing that on the primal pattern in the     
real amber. he escaped, however. i was just over the hill with gerard,             
sending a squad of guards through to fiona in that place, to prevent his           
returning and trying again. our own pattern and that in rebma are also             
under guard because of him.”                                                       
“why does he want so badly to attune it? so he can raise a few storms?             
hell, he could take a walk in shadow and make all the weather he wants.”           
“a person attuned to the jewel could use it to erase the pattern.”                 
“oh? what happens then?”                                                           
“the world as we know it comes to an end.”                                         
“oh,” random said again. then, “how the hell do you know?”                         
“it is a long story and i haven’t the time, but i had it from dworkin and          
i believe that much of what he said.”                                              
“he’s still around?”                                                               
“later,” i said.                                                                   
“okay. but brand would have to be mad to do something like that.”                  
i nodded.                                                                          
“i believe he thinks he could then cast a new pattern, redesign the                
universe with himself as chief executive.”                                         
“could this be done?”                                                              
“theoretically, perhaps. but even dworkin has certain doubts that the              
feat could be repeated effectively now. the combination of factors was             
unique… yes, i believe brand is somewhat mad. looking back over the                
years, recalling his personality changes, his cycles of moods, it seems there      
was something of a schizoid pattern there. i do not know whether the deal          
he made with the enemy pushed him over the edge or not. it does not really         
matter. i wish he were back in his tower. i wish gerard were a worse               
physician.”                                                                        
“do you know who stabbed him?”                                                     
“fiona. you can get the story from her, though.”                                   
he leaned against my epitaph and shook his head.                                   
“brand,” he said. “damn him. any one of us might have killed him on a              
number of occasions—in the old days. just when he would get you mad                
enough, though, he would change. after a while, you would get to thinking          
he wasn’t such a bad guy after all. too bad he didn’t push one of us just a        
little harder at the wrong time…”                                                  
“then i take it he is now fair game?” said martin.                                 
i looked at him. the muscles in his jaws had tightened and his eyes                
narrowed. for a moment, all of our faces fled across his, like a riffling of       
the family cards. all of our egoism, hatred, envy, pride, and abuse seemed         
to flow by in that instant—and he had not even set foot in amber yet.              
something snapped inside me and i reached out and seized him by the                
shoulders.                                                                         
“you have good reason to hate him,” i said, “and the answer to your                
question is ‘yes.’ the hunting season is open. i see no way to deal with him       
other than to destroy him. i hated him myself for so long as he remained an        
abstraction. but—now—it is different. yes, he must be killed. but do not let       
that hatred be your baptism into our company. there has been too much of           
it among us. i look at your face—i don’t know… i am sorry, martin. too             
much is going on right now. you are young. i have seen more things. some           
of them bother me—differently. that’s all.”                                        
i released my grip and stepped back.                                               
“tell me about yourself,” i said.                                                  
“i was afraid of amber for a long while,” he began, “and i guess that i            
still am. ever since he attacked me, i have been wondering whether brand           
might catch up with me again. i have been looking over my shoulder for             
years. i have been afraid of all of you, i suppose. i knew most of you as          
pictures on cards—with bad reputations attached. i told random—dad—                
that i did not want to meet you all at once, and he suggested that i see you       
first. neither of us realized at the time that you would be particularly           
interested in certain things that i know. after i mentioned them though. dad       
said i had to see you as soon as possible. he has been telling me all about        
what has been going on and—you see, i know something about it.”                    
“i had a feeling that you might—when a certain name cropped up not                 
too long ago.”                                                                     
“the tecys?” random said.                                                          
“the same.”                                                                        
“it is difficult, deciding where to start…” martin said.                           
“i know that you grew up in rebma, walked the pattern, and then used               
your power over shadow to visit benedict in avalon,” i said. “benedict told        
you more about amber and shadow, taught you the use of the trumps,                 
coached you in weaponry. later, you departed to walk in shadow by                  
yourself. and i know what brand did to you. that is the sum of my                  
knowledge.”                                                                        
he nodded, stared off into the west.                                               
“after i left benedict’s, i traveled for years in shadow,” he said. “those         
were the happiest times i have known. adventure, excitement, new things            
to see, to do… in the back of my mind, i always had it that one day when i         
was smarter and tougher—more experienced—i would journey to amber                  
and meet my other relatives. then brand caught up with me. i was camped            
on a little hillside, just resting from a long ride and taking my lunch, on my     
way to visit my friends the tecys. brand contacted me then. i had reached          
benedict with his trump, when he was teaching me how to use them, and              
other times when i had traveled. he had even transported me through                
occasionally, so i knew what it felt like, knew what it was all about. this        
felt the same way, and for a moment, i thought that somehow it was                 
benedict calling me. but no. it was brand—i recognized him from his                
picture in the deck. he was standing in the midst of what seemed to be the         
pattern. i was curious. i did not know how he had reached me. so far as i          
knew, there was no trump for me. he talked for a minute—i forget what he           
said—and when everything was firm and clear, he—he stabbed me. i                   
pushed him and pulled away then. he held the contact somehow. it was               
hard for me to break it—and when i did, he tried to reach me again. but i          
was able to block him. benedict had taught me that. he tried again, several        
times, but i kept blocking. finally, he stopped. i was near to the tecys. i        
managed to get onto my horse and make it to their place. i thought i was           
going to die, because i had never been hurt that badly before. but after a         
time, i began to recover. then i grew afraid once again, afraid that brand         
would find me and finish what he had begun.”                                       
“why didn’t you contact benedict,” i asked him, “and tell him what had             
happened, tell him of your fears?”                                                 
“i thought of that,” he said, “and i also thought of the possibility that          
brand believed he had succeeded, that i was indeed dead. i did not know            
what sort of power struggle was going on in amber, but i decided that the          
attempt on my life was probably part of such a thing. benedict had told me         
enough about the family that this was one of the first things to come to           
mind. so i decided that perhaps it would be better to remain dead. i left the      
tecys before i was completely recovered and rode off to lose myself in             
shadow.                                                                            
“i happened upon a strange thing then,” he continued, “a thing i had               
never before encountered, but which now seemed virtually omnipresent: in           
nearly all of the shadows through which i passed, there was a peculiar black       
road existing in some form or other. i did not understand it, but since it was     
the only thing i had come across which seemed to traverse shadow itself,           
my curiosity was aroused. i resolved to follow it and learn more about it. it      
was dangerous. i learned very quickly not to tread the thing. strange shapes       
seemed to travel it at night. natural creatures which ventured upon it             
sickened and died. so i was careful. i went no nearer than was necessary to        
keep it in sight. i followed it through many places. i quickly learned that        
everywhere it ran there was death, desolation, or trouble nearby. i did not        
know what to make of it.                                                           
“i was still weak from my wound,” he went on, “and i made the mistake              
of pressing myself, of riding too far, too fast, in a day’s time. that evening,    
i fell ill and i lay shivering in my blanket through the night and much of the     
next day. i was into and out of delirium during this time, so i do not know        
exactly when she appeared. she seemed like part of my dream much of the            
while. a young girl. pretty. she took care of me while i recovered. her            
name was dara. we talked interminably. it was very pleasant. having                
someone to talk with like that… i must have told her my whole life story.          
then she told me something of herself. she was not a native of the area in         
which i had collapsed. she said that she had traveled there through shadow.        
she could not yet walk through it as we do, though she felt she could learn        
to do this, as she claimed descent from the house of amber through                 
benedict. in fact, she wanted very badly to learn how it was done. her             
means of travel then was the black road itself. she was immune to its              
noxious effects, she said, because she was also related to the dwellers at its     
farther end, in the courts of chaos. she wanted to learn our ways though,          
so i did my best to instruct her in those things that i did know. i told her of    
the pattern, even sketched it for her. i showed her my trumps—benedict             
had given me a deck—to show her the appearance of her other relatives.             
she was particularly interested in yours.”                                         
“i begin to understand,” i said. “go on.”                                          
“she told me that amber, in the fullness of its corruption and                     
presumption, had upset a kind of metaphysical balance between itself and           
the courts of chaos. her people now had the job of redressing the matter by        
laying waste to amber. their own place is not a shadow of amber, but a             
solid entity in its own right. in the meantime, all of the intervening shadows     
are suffering because of the black road. my knowledge of amber being               
what it was, i could only listen. at first, i accepted everything that she said.   
brand, to me, certainly fit her description of evil in amber. but when i           
mentioned him, she said no. he was some sort of hero back where she hied           
from. she was uncertain as to the particulars, but it did not trouble her all      
that much. it was then that i realized how oversure she seemed about               
everything—there was a ring of the fanatic when she talked. almost                 
unwillingly, i found myself trying to defend amber. i thought of llewella          
and of benedict—and of gerard, whom i had met a few times. she was                 
eager to learn of benedict, i discovered. that proved the soft spot in her         
armor. here i could speak with some knowledge, and here she was willing            
to believe the good things i had to say. so, i do not know what the ultimate       
effect of all this talk was, except that she seemed somewhat less sure of          
herself near the end…”                                                             
“the end?” i said. “what do you mean? how long was she with you?”                  
“almost a week,” he replied. “she had said she would take care of me               
until i was recovered, and she did. actually, she remained several days            
longer. she said that was just to be sure, but i think it was really that she      
wanted to continue our conversations. finally though, she said that she had        
to be moving on. i asked her to stay with me, but she said no. i offered to go     
with her, but she said no to that, too. she must have realized that i planned      
to follow her then, because she slipped away during the night. i could not         
ride the black road, and i had no idea what shadow she would travel to next        
on her way to amber. when i awoke in the morning and realized she had              
gone, i thought for a time of visiting amber myself. but i was still afraid.       
perhaps some of the things she had said had reinforced my own fears.               
whatever, i decided to remain in shadow. and so i traveled on, seeing              
things, trying to learn things—until random found me and told me he                
wanted me to come home. he brought me here first though, to meet you,              
because he wanted you to hear my story before any of the others. he said           
that you knew dara, that you wanted to learn more about her. i hope that i         
have helped.”                                                                      
“yes,” i said. “thank you.”                                                        
“i understand that she did finally walk the pattern.”                              
“yes, she succeeded in that.”                                                      
“and afterward declared herself an enemy of amber.”                                
“that, too.”                                                                       
“i hope,” he said, “that she comes to no harm from all this. she was               
kind to me.”                                                                       
“she seems quite able to take care of herself,” i said. “but… yes, she is          
a likable girl. i cannot promise you anything concerning her safety, because       
i still know so little about her, so little of her part in everything that is going
on. yet, what you have told me has been helpful. it makes her someone i            
would still like to grant doubt’s benefit, as far as i can.”                       
he smiled.                                                                         
“i am glad to hear that.”                                                          
i shrugged.                                                                        
“what are you going to do now?” i asked.                                           
“i am taking him to see vialle,” random said, “and then to meet the                
others, as time and opportunity permit. unless, of course, something new           
has developed and you need me now.”                                                
“there have been new developments,” i said, “but i do not really need              
you now. i had better bring you up to date, though. i still have a little time.”   
as i filled random in on events since his departure, i thought about               
martin. he was still an unknown quantity so far as i was concerned. his            
story might be perfectly true. in fact, i felt that it was. on the other hand, i   
had a feeling that it was not complete, that he was intentionally leaving          
something out. maybe something harmless. then again, maybe not. he had             
no real reason to love us. quite the contrary. and random could be                 
bringing home a trojan horse. probably though, it was nothing like that. it        
is just that i never trust anyone if there is an alternative available.            
still, nothing that i was telling random could really be used against us,          
and i strongly doubted that martin could do us much damage if that was his         
intention. no, more likely he was being as cagey as the rest of us, and for        
pretty much the same reasons: fear and self preservation. on a sudden              
inspiration, i asked him, “did you ever run into dara again after that?”           
he flushed.                                                                        
“no,” he said, too quickly.                                                        
“just that time. that’s all.”                                                      
“i see,” i said, and random was too good a poker player not to have                
noticed; so i had just bought us a piece of instant insurance at the small         
price of putting a father on guard against his long—lost son.                      
i quickly shifted our talk back to brand. it was while we were                     
comparing notes on psychopathology that i felt the tiny tingle and the sense       
of presence which heralds a trump contact. i raised my hand and turned             
aside.                                                                             
in a moment the contact was clear and ganelon and i regarded one                   
another.                                                                           
“corwin,” he said, “i decided it was time to check. by now, you have               
the jewel, brand has the jewel, or you are both still looking. which one is        
it?”                                                                               
“brand has the jewel,” i said.                                                     
“more’s the pity,” he said. “tell me about it.”                                    
so i did.                                                                          
“then gerard had the story right,” he said.                                        
“he’s already told you all this?”                                                  
“not in such detail,” ganelon replied, “and i wanted to be sure i was              
getting it straight. i just finished speaking with him.”                           
he glanced upward.                                                                 
“it would seem you had best be moving then, if my memories of                      
moonrise serve me right.”                                                          
i nodded.                                                                          
“yes, i will be heading for the stairway shortly. it is not all that far from      
here.”                                                                             
“good. now here is what you must be ready to do—”                                  
“i know what i have to do,” i said. “i have to get up to tir-na nog’th             
before brand does and block his way to the pattern. failing that, i have to        
chase him through it again.”                                                       
“that is not the way to go about it,” he said.                                     
“you have a better idea?”                                                          
“yes, i do. you have your trumps with you?”                                        
“yes.”                                                                             
“good. first, you would not be able to get up there in time to block his           
way to the pattern—”                                                               
“why not?”                                                                         
“you have to make the ascension, then you have to walk to the palace               
and make your way down to the pattern. that takes time, even in tir-na             
nog’th—especially in tir-na nog’th, where time tends to play tricks                
anyway. for all you know, you may have a hidden death wish slowing you             
down. i don’t know. whatever the case, he would have commenced walking             
the pattern by the time you arrived. it may well be that he would be too far       
into it for you to reach him this time.”                                           
“he will probably be tired. that should slow him some.”                            
“no. put yourself in his place. if you were brand, wouldn’t you have               
headed for some shadow where the time flow was different? instead of an            
afternoon, he could well have taken several days to rest up for this               
evening’s ordeal. it is safest to assume that he will be in good shape.”           
“you are right,” i said. “i can’t count on it. okay. an alternative i had          
entertained but would rather not try if it could be avoided, would be to kill      
him at a distance. take along a crossbow or one of our rifles and simply           
shoot him in the midst of the pattern. the thing that bothers me about it is       
the effect of our blood on the pattern. it may be that it is only the primal       
pattern that suffers from it, but i don’t know.”                                   
“that’s right. you do not know,” he said. “also, i would not want you              
to rely on normal weapons up there. that is a peculiar place. you said             
yourself it is like a strange piece of shadow drifting in the sky. while you       
figured how to make a rifle fire in amber, the same rules may not apply up         
there.”                                                                            
“it is a risk,” i acknowledged.                                                    
“as for the crossbow—supposing a sudden gust of wind deflected the                 
bolt each time you shot one?”                                                      
“i am afraid i do not follow you.”                                                 
“the jewel. he walked it part way through the primal pattern, and he               
has had some time to experiment with it since then. do you think it possible       
that he is partly attuned to it now?”                                              
“i do not know. i am not at all that sure how the process works.”                  
“i just wanted to point out that if it does work that way, he may be able          
to use it to defend himself. the jewel may even have other properties you          
are not aware of. so what i am saying is that i would not want you to count        
on being able to kill him at a distance. and i would not even want you to          
rely on being able to pull the trick you did with the jewel again—not if he        
may have gained some measure of control over it.”                                  
“you do make things look a little bleaker than i had them.”                        
“but possibly more realistic,” he said.                                            
“conceded. go on. you said you had a plan.”                                        
“that is correct. my thinking is that brand must not be allowed to reach           
the pattern at all, that once he sets foot upon it the probability of disaster     
goes way up.”                                                                      
“and you do not think i can get there in time to block him?”                       
“not if he can really transport himself around almost instantaneously              
while you have to take a long walk. my bet is that he is just waiting for          
moonrise, and as soon as the city takes form he will be inside, right next to      
the pattern.”                                                                      
“i see the point, but not the answer.”                                             
“the answer is that you are not going to set foot in tir-na nog’th                 
tonight.”                                                                          
“hold on a minute!”                                                                
“hold on, hell! you imported a master strategist, you’d better listen to           
what he has to say.”                                                               
“okay, i am listening.”                                                            
“you have agreed that you probably cannot reach the place in time. but             
someone else can.”                                                                 
“who and how?”                                                                     
“all right. i have been in touch with benedict. he has returned. at this           
moment, he is in amber, down in the chamber of the pattern. by now, he             
should have finished walking it and be standing there at its center, waiting.      
you proceed to the foot of the stairs to the sky-city. there you await the         
rising of the moon. as soon as tir-na nog’th takes form, you will contact          
benedict via his trump. you tell him that all is ready, and he will use the        
power of the pattern in amber to transport himself to the place of the             
pattern in tir-na nog’th. no matter how fast brand travels, he cannot gain         
much on that.”                                                                     
“i see the advantages,” i said. “that is the fastest way to get a man up           
there and benedict is certainly a good man. he should have no trouble              
dealing with brand.”                                                               
“do you really think brand will make no other preparations?” ganelon               
said.                                                                              
“from everything i’ve heard about the man, he’s smart even if he is                
daft. he just may anticipate something like this.”                                 
“possibly. any idea what he might do?”                                             
he made a sweeping gesture with one hand, slapped his neck and                     
smiled.                                                                            
“a bug,” he said. “pardon me. pesky little things.”                                
“you still think—”                                                                 
“i think you had better remain in contact with benedict the entire time            
he is up there, that is what i think. if brand gets the upper hand, you may        
need to pull benedict back immediately to save his life.”                          
“of course. but then—”                                                             
“but then we would have lost a round. admitted. but not the game.                  
even with the jewel fully attuned, he would have to get to the primal              
pattern to do his real damage with it—and you have that under guard.”              
“yes,” i said. “you seem to have everything figured. you surprised me,             
moving so fast.”                                                                   
“i’ve had a lot of time on my hands recently, which can be a bad thing             
unless you use it for thinking. so i did. what i think now is that you had         
best move fast. the day isn’t getting any longer.”                                 
“agreed,” i said. “thanks for the good counsel.”                                   
“save your thanks till we see what comes of it,” he said, and then he              
broke the contact.                                                                 
“that one sounded important,” random said. “what’s up?”                            
“appropriate question,” i answered, “but i am all out of time now. you             
will have to wait till morning for the story.”                                     
“is there anything i can do to help?”                                              
“as a matter of fact,” i said, “yes, if you’ll either ride double or go back       
to amber on a trump. i need star.”                                                 
“sure,” random said. “no trouble. is that all?”                                    
“yes. haste is all.”                                                               
we moved toward the horses.                                                        
i patted star a few times and then mounted.                                        
“we’ll see you in amber,” random said. “good luck.”                                
“in amber,” i said. “thanks.”                                                      
i turned and headed toward the place of the stairway, treading my                  
tomb’s lengthening shadow eastward.                                                
                                                                      
chapter 13                                                                         
on the highest ridge of kolvir there is a formation which resembles three          
steps. i sat on the lowest of these and waited for more to occur above me. it      
takes night and moonlight to do this, so half of the requirements had been         
met.                                                                               
there were clouds to the west and northeast. i was leery of those clouds.          
if they massed sufficiently to block all moonlight, tir-na nog’th faded back       
to nothingness. this was one reason why it was always advisable to have a          
backup man on the ground, to trump you to safety should the city vanish            
about you.                                                                         
the sky overhead was clear, however, and filled with familiar stars.               
when the moon came up and its light fell upon the stone at which i rested,         
the stairway in the sky would come into being, sweeping upward to a great          
height, taking its way to tir-na nog’th, the image of amber that rode the          
night’s middle air.                                                                
i was weary. too much had occurred in too brief a time. suddenly to be             
at rest, to remove my boots and rub my feet, to lean back and rest my head,        
even against stone, was a luxury, a pure animal pleasure. i drew my cloak          
together before me against the growing chill. a hot bath, a full meal, a bed       
would be very good things. but these assumed an almost mythic quality              
from that vantage. it was more than sufficient simply to rest as i was, to let     
my thoughts move more slowly, drifting, spectatorlike, back over the day’s         
happenings.                                                                        
so much… but now, at least, i had some answers to some of my                       
questions. not all of them, certainly. but enough to slake my mind’s thirst        
for the moment… i now had some idea as to what had been going on during            
my absence, a better understanding of what was happening now, a                    
knowledge of some of the things that had to be done, of what i had to do…          
and i felt, somehow, that i knew more than i realized, consciously, that i         
already possessed pieces that would fit the growing picture before me, if i        
were only to jiggle them, flip them, rotate them properly. the pace of recent      
events, particularly today’s, had not allowed me a moment’s reflection.            
now, though, some of the pieces seemed to be turning at odd angles…                
i was distracted by a stirring above my shoulder, a tiny effect of                 
brightening in the higher air. turning, then standing, i regarded the horizon.     
a preliminary glow had occurred out over the sea at the point where the            
moon would ascend. as i watched, a minute arc of light came into view.             
the clouds had shifted slightly also, though not enough to cause concern. i        
glanced up then, but the overhead phenomenon had not yet begun. i                  
withdrew my trumps, however, riffled them, and cut out benedict’s.                 
lethargy forgotten, i stared, watching the moon expand above the                   
water, casting a trail of light over the waves. a faint form was suddenly          
hovering on the threshold of visibility high overhead. as the light grew, a        
spark limned it here and there. the first lines, faint as spider webbing,          
appeared above the rock. i studied benedict’s card, i reached for contact…         
his cold image came alive. i saw him in the chamber of the pattern,                
standing at the designs’ center. a lighted lantern glowed beside his left foot.    
he became aware of my presence.                                                    
“corwin,” he said, “is it time?”                                                   
“not quite,” i told him. “the moon is rising. the city is just beginning           
to take form. so it will only be a little longer. i wanted to be certain you       
were ready.”                                                                       
“i am ready,” he said.                                                             
“it is good that you came back when you did. did you learn anything of             
interest?”                                                                         
“ganelon called me back,” he said, “as soon as he learned what had                 
happened. his plan seemed a good one, which is why i am here. as for the           
courts of chaos, yes. i believe i have learned a few things—”                      
“a moment,” i said.                                                                
the moonbeam strands had assumed a more tangible appearance. the                   
city overhead was now clear in outline. the stairway was visible in its            
entirety, though fainter in some places than in others. i stretched forth          
enough to slake my mind’s thirst for the moment…                                   
cool, soft, i encountered the fourth stair. it seemed to give somewhat             
beneath my push, however.                                                          
“almost,” i said to benedict. “i am going to try the stairs. be ready.”            
he nodded.                                                                         
i mounted the stone stairs, one, two, three. i raised my foot then and             
lowered it upon the fourth, ghostly one. it yielded gently to my weight. i         
was afraid to raise my other foot, so i waited, watching the moon. i               
breathed the cool air as the brightness increased, as the path in the waters       
widened. glancing upward, i saw tir-na nog’th lose something of its                
transparency. the stars behind it grew dimmer. as this occurred, the stair         
became firmer beneath my foot. all resiliency went out of it. i felt that it       
might bear my full weight. casting my eyes along its length, i now saw it in       
its entirety, here translucent, there transparent, sparkling, but continuous all   
the way up to the silent city that drifted above the sea. i raised my other foot   
and stood on the fourth stair. if i’d the mind, a few more steps would send        
me along that celestial escalator into the place of dreams made real, walking      
neuroses and dubious prophecy, into a moonlit city of ambiguous wish               
fulfillment, twisted time, and pallid beauty. i stepped back down and              
glanced at the moon, now balanced on the world’s wet rim. i regarded               
benedict’s trump in its silvery glow.                                              
“the stair is solid, the moon is up,” i said.                                      
“all right. i am going.”                                                           
i watched him there at the center of the pattern. he raised the lantern in         
his left hand and for a moment stood unmoving. an instant later he was             
gone, and so was pattern. another instant, and he stood within a similar           
chamber, this time outside the pattern, next to the point where it begins. he      
raised the lantern high and looked all around the room. he was alone.              
he turned, walked to the wall, set the lantern beside it. his shadow               
stretched toward the pattern, changed shape as he turned on his heel, moved        
back to his first position.                                                        
this pattern, i noted, glowed with a paler light than the one in amber—            
silvery white, without the hint of blue with which i was familiar. its             
configuration was the same, but the ghost city played strange tricks with          
perspective. there were distortions—narrowings, widenings—which                    
seemed to shift for no particular reason across its surface, as though i           
viewed the entire tableau through an irregular lens rather than benedict’s         
trump.                                                                             
i retreated down the stairs, settled once again on the lowest step. i              
continued to observe.                                                              
benedict loosened his blade in its scabbard.                                       
“you know about the possible effect of blood on the pattern?” i asked.             
“yes. ganelon told me.”                                                            
“did you ever suspect—any of this?”                                                
“i never trusted brand,” he told me.                                               
“what of your journey to the courts of chaos? what did you learn?”                 
“later, corwin. he could come any time now.”                                       
“i hope no distracting visions show up,” i said, recalling my own                  
journey to tir-na nog’th and his own part in my final adventure there.             
he shrugged.                                                                       
“one gives them power by paying them heed. my attention is reserved                
for one matter tonight.”                                                           
he turned through a full circle, regarding every part of the chamber,              
halted when he had finished.                                                       
“i wonder if he knows you are there?” i said.                                      
“perhaps. it does not matter.”                                                     
i nodded. if brand did not show up, we had gained a day. the guards                
would ward the other patterns, fiona would have a chance to demonstrate            
her own skill in matters arcane by locating brand for us. we would then            
pursue him. she and bleys had been able to stop him once before. could             
she do it alone now? or would we have to find bleys and try to convince            
him to help? had brand found bleys? what the hell did brand want this              
kind of power for anyhow? a desire for the throne i could understand.              
yet… the man was mad, leave it at that. too bad, but that’s the way it was.        
heredity or environment? i wondered wryly. we were all of us, to some              
degree, mad after his fashion. to be honest, it had to be a form of madness,       
to have so much and to strive so bitterly for just a little more, for a bit of an  
edge over the others. he carried this tendency to its extreme, that is all. he     
was a caricature of this mania in all of us. in this sense, did it really matter   
which of us was the traitor?                                                       
yes, it did. he was the one who had acted. mad or not, he had gone too             
far. he had done things eric, julian, and i would not have done. bleys and         
fiona had finally backed away from his thickening plot. gerard and                 
benedict were a notch above the rest of us—moral, mature, whatever—for             
they had exempted themselves from the zero-sum power game. random                  
had changed, quite a bit, in recent years. could it be that the children of the    
unicorn took ages in which to mature, that it was slowly happening to the          
rest of us but had somehow passed brand by? or could it be that by his             
actions brand was causing it in the rest of us? like most such questions, the      
benefit of these was in the asking, not the answering. we were enough like         
brand that i knew a particular species of fear nothing else could so provoke.      
but yes, it did matter. whatever the reason, he was the one who had acted.         
the moon was higher now, its vision superimposed upon my inward                    
viewing of the chamber of the pattern. the clouds continued to shift, to boil      
nearer the moon. i thought of advising benedict, but it would serve no other       
end than distraction. above me, tir-na nog’th rode like some supernatural          
ark upon the seas of night                                                         
… and suddenly brand was there.                                                    
reflexively, my hand went to grayswandir’s hilt, despite the fact that a           
part of me realized from the very first that he stood across the pattern from      
benedict in a dark chamber high in the sky.                                        
my hand fell again. benedict had become aware of the intruding                     
presence immediately, and he turned to face him. he made no move toward            
his weapon, but simply stared across the pattern at our brother.                   
my earliest fear had been that brand would contrive to arrive directly             
behind benedict and stab him in the back. i would not have tried that              
though, because even in death benedict’s reflexes might have been                  
sufficient to dispatch his assailant apparently, brand wasn’t that crazy           
either.                                                                            
brand smiled.                                                                      
“benedict,” he said. “fancy… you… here.”                                           
the jewel of judgment hung fiery upon his breast.                                  
“brand,” benedict said, “don’t try it.”                                            
still smiling. brand unclasped his sword belt and let his weapon fall to           
the floor. when the echoes died, he said, “i am not a fool, benedict. the          
man hasn’t been born who can go up against you with a blade.”                      
“i don’t need the blade, brand.”                                                   
brand began walking, slowly, about the edge of the pattern.                        
“yet you wear it as a servant of the throne, when you could have been              
king.”                                                                             
“that has never been high on my list of ambitions.”                                
“that is right.” he paused, only part way about the pattern.                       
“loyal, self—effacing. you have not changed at all. pity dad                       
conditioned you so well. you could have gone so much further.”                     
“i have everything that i want,” benedict said.                                    
“…to have been stifled, cut off, so early.”                                        
“you cannot talk your way past me either, brand. do not make me hurt               
you.”                                                                              
the smile still on his face. brand began moving again, slowly. what                
was it he was trying to do? i could not figure his strategy.                       
“you know i can do certain things the others cannot,” brand said. “if              
there is anything at all that you want and think that you cannot have, now is      
your chance to name it and learn how wrong you were. i have learned                
things you would scarcely believe.”                                                
benedict smiled one of his rare smiles.                                            
“you have chosen the wrong line,” he said. “i can walk to anything that            
i want.”                                                                           
“shadows!” brand snorted, halting again. “any of the others can clutch             
a phantom! i am talking of reality! amber! power! chaos! not daydreams             
made solid! not second best!”                                                      
“if i had wanted more than i have, i knew what to do. i did not do it.”            
brand laughed, began walking again. he had come a quarter of the way               
about the pattern’s periphery. the jewel burned more brightly. his voice           
rang.                                                                              
“you are a fool, to wear your chains willingly! but if things do not call          
out to you to possess them and if power holds no attraction, what of               
knowledge? i learned the last of dworkin’s lore. i have gone on since then         
and paid dark prices for greater insight into the workings of the universe.        
this you could have without that price tag.”                                       
“there would be a price,” benedict said, “one that i will not pay.”                
brand shook his head and tossed his hair. the image of the pattern                 
wavered for a moment then, as a wisp of cloud crossed the moon. tir-na             
nog’th faded slightly, returned to normal focus.                                   
“you mean it, you really mean it,” brand said, apparently not aware of             
the moment of fading.                                                              
“i shan’t test you further then. i had to try.”                                    
he halted again, staring.                                                          
“you are too good a man to waste yourself on that mess in amber,                   
defending something that is obviously falling apart. i am going to win,            
benedict. i am going to erase amber and build it anew. i am going to rub           
out the old pattern and draw my own. you can be with me. i want you on             
my side. i am going to raise up a perfect world, one with more direct access       
to and from shadow. i am going to merge amber with the courts of chaos.            
i am going to extend this realm directly through all of shadow. you will           
command our legions, the mightiest military forces ever assembled. you—”           
“if your new world would be as perfect as you say, brand, there would              
be no need for legions. if, on the other hand, it is to reflect the mind of its    
creator, then i see it as something less than an improvement over the present      
state of affairs. thank you for your offer, but i hold with the amber which        
already exists.”                                                                   
“you are a fool, benedict. a well—meaning one, but a fool                          
nevertheless.”                                                                     
he began to move again, casually. he was within forty feet of benedict.            
thirty… he kept moving. he finally paused about twenty feet away,                  
hooked his thumbs behind his belt, and simply stared. benedict met his             
gaze. i checked the clouds again. a long mass of them continued a                  
moonward slide. i could pull benedict out at any time, though. it was              
hardly worth disturbing him at the moment.                                         
“why don’t you come and cut me down then?” brand finally said.                     
“unarmed as i am, it should not be difficult. the fact that the same blood         
flows in both our veins makes no difference, does it? what are you waiting         
for?”                                                                              
“i already told you that i do not wish to hurt you,” benedict said.                
“yet you stand ready to, if i attempt to pass your way.”                           
benedict simply nodded.                                                            
“admit that you fear me, benedict. all of you are afraid of me. even               
when i approach you weaponless like this, something mast be twisting your          
guts. you see my confidence and you do not understand it. you must be              
afraid.”                                                                           
benedict did not reply.                                                            
“…and you fear my blood on your hands,” brand went on, “you fear                   
my death curse.”                                                                   
“did you fear martin’s blood on your own?” benedict asked.                         
“that bastard puppy!” brand said. “he was not truly one of us. he was              
only a tool.”                                                                      
“brand, i have no desire to kill a brother. give me that trinket you wear          
about your neck and come back with me now to amber. it is not too late to          
set matters right.”                                                                
brand threw back his head and laughed.                                             
“oh, nobly spoken! nobly spoken, benedict! like a true lord of the                 
realm! you would shame me with your excessive virtue! and what is the              
sticking point of this all?”                                                       
he reached down and stroked the jewel of judgment.                                 
“this?”                                                                            
he laughed again and strode forward.                                               
“this bauble? would its surrender buy us peace, amity, order? would it             
ransom my life?”                                                                   
he halted once more, ten feet from benedict now. he raised the jewel               
between his fingers and looked down at it.                                         
“do you realize the full powers of this thing?” he asked.                          
“enough of th—” benedict began, and his voice cracked in his throat.               
brand hurriedly took another step forward. the jewel was bright before             
him. benedict’s hand had begun to move toward his blade, but it did not            
reach it. he stood stiffly now, as if suddenly transformed into a statue. then     
i began to understand, but by then it was too late.                                
nothing that brand had been saying had really mattered. it had simply              
been a running line of patter, a distraction thrown up before him while he         
sought cautiously after the proper range. he was indeed partly attuned to          
the jewel, and the limited control this gave him was still sufficient to enable    
him to produce effects with it, effects which i was unaware it could               
produce, but of which he had known all along.                                      
brand had carefully contrived his arrival a good distance from benedict,           
tried the jewel, moved a little nearer, tried again, kept up this movement,        
this testing, until he found the point where it could affect benedict’s            
nervous system.                                                                    
“benedict,” i said, “you had better come to me now,” and i exerted my              
will, but he did not budge nor did he reply.                                       
his trump was still functioning, i felt his presence, i observed events            
because of it, but i could not reach him. the jewel was obviously affecting        
more than his motor system.                                                        
i looked to the clouds again. they were still growing, they were                   
reaching for the moon. it seemed they might come across it soon. if i could        
not pull benedict out when it happened, he would fall to the sea as soon as        
the light was fully blocked, the city disrupted. brand! if he became aware of      
it, he might be able to use the jewel to dissipate the clouds. but to do that,     
he would probably have to release benedict. i did not think he would do it.        
still… the clouds seemed to be slowing now. this entire line of reasoning          
could become unnecessary. i thumbed out brand’s trump though, and set it           
aside.                                                                             
“benedict, benedict,” said brand, smiling, “of what use is the finest              
swordsman alive if he cannot move to take up his blade? i told you that you        
were a fool. did you think i would walk willingly to my slaughter? you             
should have trusted the fear you must have felt. you should have known             
that i would not enter this place helpless. i meant it when i said that i was      
going to win. you were a good choice though, because you are the best. i           
really wish that you had accepted my offer. but it is not that important now.      
i cannot be stopped. none of the others has a chance, and with you gone            
things are going to be much easier.”                                               
he reached beneath his cloak and produced a dagger.                                
“bring me through, benedict!” i cried, but it was no use. there was no             
response, no strength to trump me up there.                                        
i seized brand’s trump. i recalled my trump battle with eric. if i could           
hit brand through his trump, i might be able to break his concentration            
sufficiently for benedict to come free. i turned all of my faculties upon the      
card, preparing for a massive mental assault. but nothing. the way was             
frozen and dark.                                                                   
it had to be that his concentration on the task at hand, his mental                
involvement with the jewel, was so complete that i simply could not reach          
him. i was blocked at every turn.                                                  
suddenly, the stairway grew paler above me and i cast a quick glance at            
the moon. a limb of cumulus now covered a portion of its face. damn!               
i returned my attention to benedict’s trump. it seemed slow, but i did             
recover the contact, indicating that somewhere, inside it all, benedict was        
still conscious. brand had moved a pace nearer and was still taunting him.         
the jewel on its heavy chain burned with the light of its use. they stood          
perhaps three paces apart now. brand toyed with the dagger.                        
“…yes, benedict,” he was saying, “you probably would have preferred                
to die in battle. on the other hand, you might look upon this as a kind of         
honor—a signal honor. in a way, your death will allow the birth of a new           
order…”                                                                            
for a moment, the pattern faded behind them. i could not tear my eyes              
from the scene to examine the moon, however. there, within the shadows             
and the flickering light, his back to the pattern, brand did not seem to           
notice. he took another step forward.                                              
“but enough of this,” he said. “there are things to be done, and the               
night grows no younger.”                                                           
he stepped nearer and lowered the blade.                                           
“good night, sweet prince,” he said, and he moved to close with him.               
at that instant, benedict’s strange mechanical right arm, torn from this           
place of shadow and silver and moonlight, moved with the speed of a                
striking snake. thing of glinting, metallic planes like the facets of a gem,       
wrist a wondrous weave of silver cable, pinned with flecks of fire, stylized,      
skeletal, a swiss toy, a mechanical insect, functional, deadly, beautiful in its   
way, it shot forward with a speed that i could not follow, while the rest of       
his body remained steady, a statue.                                                
the mechanical fingers caught the jewel’s chain about brand’s neck.                
immediately, the arm moved upward, raising brand high above the floor.             
brand dropped the dagger and clutched at his throat with both hands.               
behind him, the pattern faded once again. it returned with a much paler            
glow. brand’s face in the lantern light was a ghastly, twisted apparition.         
benedict remained frozen, holding him on high, unmoving, a human                   
gallows.                                                                           
the pattern grew dimmer. above me, the steps began to recede. the                  
moon was half—occluded.                                                            
writhing, brand raised his arms above his head, catching at the chain on           
either side of the metal hand that held it. he was strong, as all of us are. i     
saw his muscles bunch and harden. by then, his face was dark and his neck          
a mass of straining cables. he bit his lip; the blood ran into his beard as he     
drew upon the chain.                                                               
with a sharp snap followed by a rattling, the chain parted and brand fell          
to the floor gasping. he rolled over once, clutching at his throat with both       
hands.                                                                             
slowly, very slowly, benedict lowered his strange arm. he still held the           
chain and the jewel. he flexed his other arm. he sighed deeply.                    
the pattern grew even dimmer. above me, tir-na nog’th became                       
transparent. the moon was almost gone.                                             
“benedict!” i cried. “can you hear me?”                                            
“yes,” he said, very softly, and he began to sink through the floor.               
“the city is fading! you’ve got to come to me right away!”                         
i extended my hand.                                                                
“brand…” he said, turning.                                                         
but brand was sinking also, and i saw that benedict could not reach                
him. i clasped benedict’s left hand and jerked. both of us fell to the ground      
beside the high outcrop.                                                           
i helped him to his feet. then we both seated ourselves on the stone. for          
a long while, we did not say anything. i looked again and tir-na nog’th was        
gone.                                                                              
i thought back over everything that had happened, so fast, so sudden,              
that day. a great weight of weariness lay upon me now, and i felt that my          
energies must be at their end, that shortly i must sleep. i could scarcely         
think straight. life had simply been too crowded recently. i leaned my back        
against the stone once more, regarding cloud and star. the pieces… the             
pieces which it seemed should fit, if only the proper jiggle, twist, or flip       
were applied… they were jiggling, twisting, and flipping now, almost of            
their own accord…                                                                  
“is he dead, do you think?” benedict asked, pulling me back from a half            
—dream of emerging forms.                                                          
“probably,” i said. “he was in bad shape when things fell apart.”                  
“it was a long way down. he might have had time to work some escape                
along the lines of his arrival.”                                                   
“right now it, does not really matter,” i said. “you’ve drawn his fangs.”          
benedict grunted. he was still holding the jewel, a much dimmer red                
than it had been so recently.                                                      
“true,” he finally said. “the pattern is safe now. i wish… i wish that             
some time, long ago, something had not been said that was said, or                 
something done that was not done. something, had we known, which might             
have let him grow differently, something which would have seen him                 
become another man than the bitter, bent thing i saw up there. it is best now      
if he is dead. but it is a waste of something that might have been.”               
i did not answer him. what he had said might or might not be right. it             
did not matter. brand might have been borderline psychotic, whatever that          
means, and then again maybe not. there is always a reason. whenever                
anything has been mucked up, whenever anything outrageous happens,                 
there is a reason for it. you still have a mucked-up, outrageous situation on      
your hands, however, and explaining it does not alleviate it one bit. if           
someone does something really rotten, there is a reason for it. learn it, if       
you care, and you learn why he is a son of a bitch. the fact is the thing that     
remains, though. brand had acted. it changed nothing to run a posthumous           
psychoanalysis. acts and their consequences are the things by which our            
fellows judge us. anything else, and all that you get is a cheap feeling of        
moral superiority by thinking how you would have done something nicer if           
it had been you. so as for the rest, leave it to heaven. i’m not qualified.        
“we had best get back to amber,” benedict said, “there are a great                 
number of things that must be done.”                                               
“wait,” i said.                                                                    
“why?”                                                                             
“i’ve been thinking.”                                                              
when i did not elaborate, he finally said, “and…?”                                 
i riffled slowly through my trumps, replacing his, replacing brand’s.              
“haven’t you wondered yet about the new arm you wear?” i asked him.                
“of course. you brought it from tir-na nog’th, under unusual                       
circumstances. it fits. it works. it proved itself tonight.”                       
“exactly. isn’t the last a lot of weight to dump on poor coincidence?              
the one weapon that gave you a chance up there, against the jewel. and it          
just happened to be a part of you—and you just happened to be the person           
who was up there, to use it? trace things back and trace them forward              
again. isn’t there an extraordinary—no, preposterous—chain of                      
coincidences involved?”                                                            
“when you put it that way…” he said.                                               
“i do. and you must realize as well as i do that there has to be more to it        
than that.”                                                                        
“all right. say that. but how? how was it done?”                                   
“i have no idea,” i said, withdrawing the card i had not looked upon in a          
long, long while, feeling its coldness beneath my finger tips, “but the            
method is not important. you asked the wrong question.”                            
“what should i have asked?”                                                        
“not ‘how?’ but ‘who?’ ”                                                           
“you think that a human agency arranged that entire chain of events, up            
through the recovery of the jewel?”                                                
“i don’t know about that. what’s human? but i do think that someone                
we both know has returned and is behind it all.”                                   
“all right. who?”                                                                  
i showed him the trump that i held.                                                
“dad? that is ridiculous? he must be dead. it’s been so long.”                     
“you know he could have engineered it. he’s that devious. we never                 
understood all of his powers.”                                                     
benedict rose to his feet. he stretched. he shook his head.                        
“i think you have been out in the cold too long, corwin. let’s go home             
now.”                                                                              
“without testing my guess? come on! that is hardly sporting. sit down              
and give me a minute. let’s try his trump.”                                        
“he would have contacted someone by now.”                                          
“i don’t think so. in fact—come on. humor me. what have we got to                  
lose?”                                                                             
“all right. why not?”                                                              
he sat down beside me. i held the trump where both of us could make                
it out. we stared at it. i relaxed my mind, i reached for contact. it came         
almost immediately.                                                                
he was smiling as he regarded as.                                                  
“good evening. that was a fine piece of work,” ganelon said. “i am                 
pleased that you brought back my trinket. i’ll be needing it soon.”                
